Preface

This is the second edition of the book "Understanding combustion". The first book
was written in 1986-1987 time frame. When this book was published, it was not
clear what the response of the readers would be. Fortunately, there was positive
feed back on the readability of the book from several unexpected quarters, both
academic and industrial. This has been the motivation to amend and add chapters
for a slightly more comprahensive book that aims to give a reader the essence of the
subject and enable him to launch into reading other books written in greater detail
meant more for a professional.

Even though the essentials have remained the same, much has happened in the
subject in the intervening period — rising cost of fossil fuels has been a serious issue
arising out of peaking of the liquid fossil fuel availability across the world. We have
burnt up much more than we can sustainably produce. Mining has been excessive.
Solid fuels like coal do not belong to this category yet. Efforts to develop and use
renewable liquid fuels like biofuels and other solid fuels including urban solid waste
brought up by indiscriminate urbanization should be on the rise. Hence, there is no
escape from combustion either at home, in the office or during travel — on ground,
in air or space. Conservation of the fuels with better combustion efficiency, limiting
the emissions of undesirable intermediate chemical components with several other
fuels have become compelling acts.

Three new chapters added to this book are: Gasification of solid fuels, Emission
of pollutants, and explosion and detonation. The developments in gasification in
the last twenty years have been the primary motivation for including the subject of
gasification. It is anticipated that it will come into vogue in all parts of world, more
particularly the developing world in the coming two decades in very significant way.
The other two subjects were missed out earlier and have therefore been included
now to ensure greater awareness among the readers.

It is useful to reiterate that this book is meant for armchair reading; only when
some students want to do some calculations, do they need to sit at a table and look
up hard data. It was thought that a general reader does not need to know where
a specific knowledge really originated from; it is sufficient that one knows that the
logic for a certain train of thought is based on experiments or a certain theory more
complex than can be set out in a small volume like this. It is for these reasons
that detailed referencing of original papers is not done. A list of books and sources
