1 Why Should One Attempt to Understand Combustion?

for instance, heat generated by fire is used to melt ores or create new alloys from
metals. Coal, the natural product arising out of a million years of compression of
plant material under the earth, is the mainstay of combustion in such cases.

Natural gas, another fuel available in some parts of the globe, for example in
Assam and Gujarat in India, is used as a fuel in engines to generate motive or
statinary power and in some instances for high temperature chemical processes.
Oils like diesel or gasoline are burnt in reciprocating engines of the compression-
ignition kind or the spark-ignition kind to generate power for stationary applica-
tions as well as for purposes of traction. Fuel oil or furnace oil, the crudest of the
liquid distillates is larely used in furnaces as well as large reciprocating engines for
generating electricity.

The Aviation Industry that has developed at a fantastic pace in the last hundred
years, uses kerosene oil in its engines, mostly the gas turbine engines; they burn
kerosene oil along with air taken from the atmosphere at high pressure. The hot
gases expand in a turbine to generate power that is used for compressing the in-
coming air and the residual power runs a propeller to provide the propulsive power
to the airplane. There are other class of engines that expand the hot high pres-
sure gases in a nozzle into the atmosphere to create high speed jets; this process
generates thrust.

And in the last forty years, going beyond the earth’s atmosphere using rockets
has become a fact. The rockets burn exotic chemicals at high pressure in a small
chamber. The hot gases so generated are expanded into the atmosphere through
nozzles as high velocity jets generating thrust to propel vehicles into space.

The understanding required to build a good combustion system is far more com-
plex than the impression that one may get witnessing biomass cook stoves using a
three-stone fire arrangement. Even a kerosene wick stove has many nuances that
may be missed because it is too common to merit observation. To light a kerosene
stove, outer perforated sheets around the wicks are first removed and the wicks are
ignited. The flames at this stage all tall sooty yellow around each wick. If now, the
outer perforated sheet is replaced, a nice bluish flame will become stabilized in the
annular region, occasionally with bluish buttons of flames around the holes in the
perforated sheet. Such an elegant simple combustion device it is, a question arises
as to whether alternate strategies for burning kerosene can be conceived? It might
be tempting to think that one can obtain other designs. There have not been many.
The only other design is that of a pressure stove which heats up kerosene in the
flame zone itself and issues it out as a gas jet. The jet of kerosene vapor entrains
the air around and burns up in a near-blue turbulent flame. It may be difficult to
appreciate that in order to design such a system, the geometric parameters must
be chosen carefully so that the duct carrying the kerosene does not burn up or the
resulting flame is from trickling drops.

The gas turbine engine combustion chamber that burns kerosene is even more
