complex. The requirement are to burn the fuel and oxidizer under lean conditions
(fuel fraction less than the correct proportion for combustion to be complete) at high
pressure to provide a relatively uniform high temperature profile at the exit cross-
section of the combustion chamber and limit the emissions of undesirable products
of combustion, namely, unburnt hydrocarbons, carbon monoxide and oxides of nitro-
gen. Minimizing the volume and weight of the system form the additional demands.
That all these requirements have been met with in the last four decades with in-
creasing index of performance is an evidence to progress in the understanding of
the processes and the use of all the advanced design tools.

The liquid fuels, in some situations, vaporise and combust with air as in kerosene
stoves. In some others, like in a furnace or gas turbine combustor, the liquid fu-
els are sprayed through injectors and the fine droplets burn up in an oxidizer-rich
environment. In solid propellants, wherein oxidizer and fuel are in close proxim-
ity, combustion takes place at high pressure. The propellant components react in
condensed phase (solid/liquid), vaporise and react exothermally in gas phase, and
transfer heat back to the condensed phase to sustain the combustion process.

At the very root of these processes is the fact that a flame is produced because
the flowing system has the fuel vapour and oxidizer mixing in the right propor-
tions, chemically reacting to release heat which becomes the sustaining element for
continued reactions. In some instances the fuel and oxidizer are mixed before reac-
tions take place. These are termed ‘premixed flames’ (e.g., kerosene wick stove). In
others, the fuel and the oxidizer are unmixed until combustion takes place at the
flame. These are diffusion flames (e.g., candle flame). The entire range of flames is
essentially either of the two extremes or a combination. There is therefore a need
to understand the interaction between the fluid flow and the chemical reaction un-
der various conditions of temperature, pressure, and ways of mixing the fuel and
the oxidizer to appreciate and design various devices — wood stove, a reciprocating
engine combustion system, a gas turbine combustor, or a rocket engine combustor.

The motivation for understanding combustion to design combustion systems
arises from two considerations: (i) the systems are too complex to be understood
easily and trial and error techniques of design simply do not work and (ii) the sys-
tems are so large that trial and error techniques are far too expensive to practice.

One important approach to understanding is dimensionless analysis. Much has
been said about dimensionless numbers in engineering literature. The most power-
ful and simple tool to understand, explain and predict the behaviour of engineering
systems including chemical systems is the method of dimensionless analysis.

There are more powerful methods which involve the solution of conservation
equations of mass, momentum, energy and species which lead to accurate predic-
tions of behaviour of chemical-engineering systems. However, useful information in
many cases can be extracted from dimensional analysis referred to above.

A better understanding does not always imply generation of a design procedure.
