2.3 Solid Fuels

ambient conditions. It is for the reason of ensuring very high reliability in ignition
that in the Apollo mission that landed a crew on the moon and got them back, the
lunar module engine which lifted off from the lunar soil used a hypergolic combina-
tion of Aerozine (50% hydrazine + 50% unsymmetrical dimethyl hydrazine) as the
fuel and nitrogen tetroxide as the oxidizer.

Among liquids, most amines (those substances with a chemical formula ending
with the group N H,) are hypergolic with nitric acid and nitrogen tetroxide. Liquid
oxygen is not hypergolic with most substances (even with kerosene). One of the
most powerful oxidizers, namely Liquid fluorine, reacts with almost everything in-
cluding glassware and is hypergolic with all fuels. It is also very toxic. As such, it
is not used much in rocket applications.

The last liquid without which this description is incomplete is liquid hydrogen.
It boils at —253°C (20 K) and, hence, is a cryogenic fluid that must be stored care-
fully, even more than liquid oxygen since its boiling point is much lower than of
liquid oxygen. Liquid Hydrogen is an excellent fuel, has low molecular weight (2)
and high energy. It is used with liquid oxygen in many rockets.

2.3 Solid Fuels

The first of these listed in Table 2.1 is biomass. The term biomass is used for the
natural product of plants that have the ability to generate carbon by photosynthe-
sis. Biomass includes firewood, leaves, bark, tiny branches, agricultural residues
like rice husk, rice straw, wheat husk, wheat straw, groundnut shells, and a host
of other plant materials. The use of biomass for combustion dates back to millions
of years. Yet, it is less investigated than liquid petroleum fuels whose use began
just a little more than a hundred years ago. The composition of all biomass is about
the same on a moisture-free and ash-free basis. The ash content of most biomass
is about 0.5-5%. But the straw, hulls of wheat and rice may have ash content as
large as 22%. Figure 2.3 shows the different compositions of biomass. Though the
composition of all biomass is about the same, the structure and form of availability
is so wide, and the moisture content so wide-ranging (from the normal 8-10% up
to 90% in the case of water lilies, hyacinth, coir pith) that their use for combustion
calls for a consideration of these factors. There are of course technologies which
were developed in the last century for using biomass for generating power as well
as meeting combustion needs. These were ignored soon after petroleum fuels be-
came naturally available. It is only the developing world which has to grapple with
the lack of both petroleum fuels as well as biomass to meet its energy needs. As
such there is a need to understand the combustion behaviour of biomass. Biomass
in the form of firewood is used for combustion on grate. Its use for the generation
of electrical power has been mentioned earlier while describing producer gas. Most
biomass is lighter than water, with densities typically about 40-90% that of water.

11
