2 What Do We Burn and Why?

The liquids mentioned under special fuels and oxidizers in Table 2.1 are used
in rocket engines. Rocket engines are basically designed to work independently of
the surrounding atmosphere so that they can go out of earth’s atmosphere and still
function. They are non-air breathing engines. As such, one can look for several
fuels and oxidizers. Since one has to carry the oxidizer also, one does not carry air
because 77% (by volume) of it is nitrogen which is inert and its density is too low
(about a thousandth of that of a liquid). One can, for instance, use liquified oxy-
gen. Alternately there are several liquids which have excess oxygen, like nitric acid
(HNOs3), red fuming nitric acid (RFNA) that has about 12-14% dissolved nitrogen
tetroxide in it), nitrogen tetroxide (N,O,), which is liquid at near ambient condi-
tions (nitrogen tetroxide should be kept below 21°C for it to be a liquid). Liquid
oxygen (03) has a boiling point of —183°C' and is called a cryogenic oxidizer since
its storage requires special design. Very good low temperature insulation should be
used that should itself be chilled before liquid oxygen is stored.

Several liquid fuels have been listed. Hydrazine (VN, H2) is an interesting liquid—
it can decompose by itself exothermally at higher temperatures and release heat.
If, for instance, an insulated tube is initially heated to 600°C and hydrazine is
sprayed into it continuously, then hydrazine decomposes to ammonia, nitrogen and
hydrogen and releases enough heat to maintain the temperature inside the tube for
continuous decomposition. But this is not the way hydrazine is actually used since
what is required is that the liquid must decompose even at ambient temperatures.
For this purpose, exotic catalysts made of iridium and molybdenum in the form of
small pellets packed into a cylindrical chamber are used. Hydrazine is then sprayed
on to the catalyst bed. The catalysts decompose the liquid into gases almost instan-
taneously. Liquids which exhibit such a property are called monopropellants. They
are used in rockets attached to satellites for producing small force (or thrust as it is
called) required for correction of attitude and position.

The next important feature of liquid fuels is what is known as hypergolic igni-
tion. To appreciate its meaning, two containers can be taken—one having a fuel like
unsymmetrical dimethyl hydrazine, NoH>(C Hs); (not usually available in chem-
istry laboratories, but in rocket laboratories) and the other, an oxidizer like red
fuming nitric acid. A pipette and a glass dish are the other accessories needed. A
small amount of fuel is first placed in the glass dish. Then a small amount of fum-
ing nitric acid is pipetted (not by sucking, but by just dipping the pipette into the
liquid, closing the top of pippette and lifting off the pipette) and dropped into the
fuel. A bright flame erupts instantly. Such reaction between liquids in the liquid
phase, releasing gaseous components which are so exothermically reactive that the
entire combustion process occurs in less than ten to fifteen milli seconds (0.01-0.015
s) is called hypergolic reaction. Combinations of liquid fuel and oxidizer with this
property are called hypergolic combinations. An important advantage of such com-
binations is that one can dispense with the igniter. Opening the valves in the fluid
path in a rocket engine would automatically ensure ignition even in near vacuum

10
