2 What Do We Burn and Why?

We burn fuels for two major purposes: (i) for generating heat for cooking, melting
metals, heat treatment etc. and (ii) for generating power—Ilike in internal combus-
tion reciprocating and rotating machinery or for generating work or force like in air
breathing and rocket engines.

The sensitivity of systems to the nature of fuel is much more in those cases
where power/ work /force (like in case (ii)) is demanded than in the case of heat
requirements (as in case (i)). Unfortunately, this fact is not greatly appreciated
and there are several examples where fuels meant for engines are used for heating
purposes as well.

Fuels can be classified into gaseous, liquid and solid forms and some are listed
in Table 2.1.

2.1 Gaseous Fuels

Liquified petroleum gas (LPG), the first of the fuels in Table 2.1 is a product of
petroleum refining. It is used as cooking gas in most urban areas in India. It is also
used as a transport fuel in three- and four-wheelers. Its name is a bit strange in
that it starts with a liquid and ends in a gas. The cylinder contains a liquid which
can be actually checked by shaking it. On opening the top valve, one gets gas. A
cylinder of about 35 litres (which you can compute based on dimensions measured)
contains about 15 kg of LPG (Fig. 2.1).

Typically, the pressure inside the cylinder is about 0.6 M Pa (note that the at-
mospheric pressure at sea level is approximately 0.1 M Pa; it is 0.101325 M Pa
exactly) i.e., the pressure is about 6 times the ambient pressure. This pressure
depends on ambient temperature. If the ambient temperature falls below —10°C,
which is common in winter in some northern areas of India close to the Himalayas,
the valve may be opened and one would get very little gas (after the cylinder has
experienced the temperature for about a day or so, for it takes quite some time for
the cold to penetrate the cylinder). A large part of the liquid may have got solidified.
Thus, the pressure inside the gas cylinder depends on temperature much like the
boiling point of water being dependent on pressure (readers will recall the familiar
