2 What Do We Burn and Why?

Table 2.2: Composition of fuels (HHC = Higher hydrocarbons)

 

 

Substance Density Composition (%)

kg/m? (Volumetric)
LPG (liquid) 540-560 C3H6 = 18, C,H;( = 80, HHC-rest
Biogas 1.1-1.2 CH, =60-80, CO, = 40-20

Producer gas (wood) 0.9-1.2 CO = 16-20, H, = 16-18, CO, = 8-
10, HHC—trace, Ny—rest

Blue water gas 0.65 H, = 50, CO = 40, CO, = 6, N, and
others—rest
Coke oven gas 0.40 H, =54, CH, =24,CO =8, CO, = 6,

(HHC + Ny)-rest

 

large rural households now have biogas plants based on cow dung. The cow dung,
which has several microbes in it, is mixed with water and allowed to settle in a
sealed container with space above the liquid for the gas to collect. The microbes
attack the biomass and generate a gas composed largely of methane and carbon
dioxide. A typical composition of biogas is given in Table 2.2.

The gas stoves that run on biogas are similar to the LPG gas stoves used for
cooking purposes. Biogas can also be used to run gasoline (spark ignition) engines
as well as diesel (compression ignition) engines in a dual fuel mode, i.e., in a mode
in which both gasoline diesel and biogas are used as fuels (largely biogas).

Producer gas is a product of oxidation — reduction reactions of air with biomass.
Oxidation results in products of combustion like carbon dioxide and water. This
is because biomass is chemically composed of elements C, H, O and some N. The
molecules of Os, in air, augmented by bound oxygen oxidises C' and H, to produce
these products. The gases that are at high temperature due to partial oxidation
pass through a bed of charcoal (which is produced because of oxidation reaction it-
self) and the reduction reaction of these gases with carbon leads to carbon monoxide
and hydrogen. Nitrogen gas can be treated as inert in all these situations except
for the generation of pollutants like oxides of nitrogen.

There are other variants of combustible gases called blue water gas, coke oven
gas, coke producer gas and blast furnace gas all produced as a result of oxidation —
reduction reactions of coal or coke with air (and steam sometimes).

2.2 Liquid Fuels

In the second group of fuels listed in Table 2.1 we have liquid fuels. The first
five liquids, namely gasoline, HSD, LDO, furnace oil and kerosene are products of
petroleum distillation. They are composed of C and H in various proportions. They
are not pure compounds. They contain a mixture of what are known as straight
