2 What Do We Burn and Why?

Table 2.4: Molecular Composition of rocket fuels (HTPB = hydroxy terminated polybu-
tadiesne, CTPB = carboxy terminated polybutadiene, AP = Ammonium perchlorate, HMX
= cyclo tetramethylene tetranitramine, NC = Nitrocellulose, NG = Nitroglycerene)

 

Species Fuel/Oxidiser Elemental Composition

 

HTPB F OH — — — (C4Hg) — — — OH

CTPB F COOH — — — (C4Hg) — — — COOH
AP Ox NH; ClO,

HMX F (H;CNNO,)4

NC F CsH7011N3 (14% No)

NG Ox C3H509N5

 

molecular chain polymers on the addition of appropriate catalyst and/or suitable
thermal curing. Polymers were conceived for solid propellant use because, (a) one
needs to mix a crystalline oxidizer like ammonium perchlorate powder at high solid
loading like 75-87% (amount of solids in the mix) with a liquid binder, and (b) after
curing it would lead to a solid with good mechanical integrity. Since low temper-
ature properties are required to be good, terminated polymers like CTPB, HTPB
were developed and currently several such polymers with excellent properties have
been obtained. Most of these fuels are based on C and H, but O and N elements
will be present to a certain extent. The oxidizers are composed of C, H, N, O and CI
elements. Table 2.4 shows the molecular composition of some of the oxidizers and
fuels used.

The propellants are of two categories: composite and double base. Composite
propellants are those in which there is only physical continuity but no molecular
mixing between the ‘fuel’ and the ‘oxidizer’ in the propellant. On the other hand,
are those in which the oxidizer (NG) and the fuel (NC) cannot be distinguished once
the propellant is made. Composite propellants are more recent and can be tailor-
made to meet more stringent performance specifications. In the case of a composite
propellant, the fuel, which is essentially a polymer, is taken first in the form of what
is known as liquid prepolymer and is mixed with the oxidizer particles (~ 20-600
pum; 1 pm = 10~%m) in appropriate proportion; a curing agent is then added to make
the prepolymer a polymer and the entire mixed material willbe cast into specific ge-
ometry in a mould. This material is then cured at elevated temperature (~ 150°C)
to obtain a hard solid. In the case of double base propellants, nitrocellulose (NC)
in the form of fine strips or pieces is mixed with liquid nitroglycerine and other
ingredients and the entire material is made into a dough which is then extruded.

Alternatively, nitrocellulose nodules (small spherical particles) are immersed in
nitroglycerine liquid in a container, called a mould, and allowed to gel at temper-
ature of 60°C or so. The extruded propellants are mechanically stronger than the
propellants made by the second process called casting procedure.

The propellants are cast in combustion chambers small to large. The space
shuttle engine booster uses several hundred tonnes of propellant. The Indian Polar

14
