3 Chemistry and Stoichiometry

The mass conservation can be stated by writing an equation like
(Xn; M5) reactants = (313 M5) products

where n; are the number of moles and .#; the molecular weight of species, i. The
स्टोइकोमेट्रिक ratio in case (3.1) is 16/2 = 8. Thus every gram of H, requires 8
grams of oxygen for complete combustion. If more than 8 grams of oxygen is used,
then one gets a fuel-lean system and if less than 8 grams of O, is used, one gets a
fuel-rich system.

We now move on to reaction (3.2). If one looks for stoichiometry with respect
to air, then it will be [16+ (79/21) x2x28]/2 = 34.4. In this reaction, nitrogen is
treated as inert. Nitrogen is a very stable molecule with a very high energy binding
the nitrogen atoms. If nitrogen were to enter into any reaction then this strong
bond must be broken. It requires very high temperatures ~ 2800 — 3000 K for a
fair fraction of the molecules of Vs to be dissociated into element nitrogen (NV). The
temperature attained in reaction (3.2) would be of the order of 2300 K. Hence one
finds that nitrogen is virtually an inert. In reaction (3.4), the species considered
is CH. There is no specific species like CH; excepting as a radical which is an
intermediate in reactions. Rather it represents an extreme case of straight chain
hydrocarbons described by C), Hs, +2. The value n = 1 gives C' H2, methane, a gas at
ambient conditions; n = 3 gives C3H6, propane, a gas. n = 4 gives C4Ho butane, a
gas at ambient conditions. It is the primary constituent of liquified petroleum gas
(LPG). C5H,, is pentane, a liquid. The series goes on like this till at CoH when
one gets solids like waxes. Thus all the straight-chain compounds can be described
by CH, 5/,. CH; is an approximate representative of the series. The स्टोइकोमेट्रिक
ratio in the case (3.3) is 3.4 and in the case (3.4) is 3.4/0.232=14.7. The last number
is very familiar. For many hydrocarbons like kerosene, diesel, gasoline, the air-to-
fuel ratio at stoichiometry is about 15. It decreases slightly from methane (17.2) to
about 15 for larger size fuel molecules like hexadecane (CigHsy).

One should be careful about the use of stoichiometry in actual situations. At
flame temperatures of the order of 2300 K or so, dissociation of the molecules of
CO, and HO occurs to a reasonable extent. Consequently, one obtains some CO,
OH, HO, and others. These are incomplete products of combustion. One, therefore,
needs additional oxygen to oxidise these. This is one of the reasons why in many IC
engines, 15-20% excess air is used (to make sure combustion is complete).

As far as stoichiometry is concerned, for hydrocarbons the products are CO, and
H>0. What will happen with other elements like Cl, Al etc? In the case of chlorine,
HC! is taken as the stable product; for Al it is AloOs. Similarly, one can determine
the stable product for other species as well.

One of the useful qualities related to stoichiometry is the equivalence ratio (e.r).
It is the ratio of fuel to oxidizer by weight in a given case to that at stoichiometry

18
