stated in the form of an equation.

(fuel/air)
(fuel/air) stoichiometry, wt basis

Thus, all स्टोइकोमेट्रिक mixtures have equivalence ratio of unity. Rich mixtures
have e.r greater than unity. Lean mixtures have e.r less than unity. By rich and
lean, one generally refers to the extent of fuel.

er =

Till now, the discussion has been about fuels which have no oxidising element in
them and vice versa. In rocket propellants both fuels and oxidizers have both the
elements and they need to be treated for fuel richness or otherwise.

For instance, one would ask about stoichiometry or equivalence ratio of ammo-
nium perchlorate (AP), nitroglycerine (NG) or nitrocellulose (NC). Take NH,C10O,
(ammonium perchlorate).

Thus, ammonium perchlorate is oxidizer rich to the extent of two and a half atoms
of oxygen. This amounts in weight basis to 40/117 = 34%. Thus one describes
Ammonium Perchlorate as oxidizer rich to the extent of 34% and it is called an
oxidizer itself.

One can similarly show nitrocellulose as slightly fuel rich and nitroglycerine as
slightly oxidizer rich. If one wishes to stoichiometrically balance the combination
to make a high performance propellant, one needs NG about 6 times as much as
nitrocellulose. This mixture gives a liquid like material and so one uses fuel rich
mixtures close to 1:1 (NC : NG).

For all propellants based on HMX, the solid crystals of HMX are set into a fuel
binder matrix. HMX is slightly fuel rich. Hence all solid propellants turn out to be
fuel rich to varying extents.

In the case of liquid propellants, monopropellants like hydrogen peroxide (H20-)
or (No H2) can be used in single propellant mode; there is no oxidizer in such cases.
H>0s is oxidizer rich to the extent of (1/2)O, implying 47% oxidizer richness. In the
case of NoH,, exothermic decomposition takes place because of relatively unstable
molecular configuration and not quite due to ‘oxidizer’ or ‘fuel’ molecules both being
present. In fact, at the temperatures considered (~1000-1400 K) Nitrogen is inert
and hydrogen is of course a fuel.

In all cases where a single molecule has both fuel and oxidizer elements or el-
ements in an unstable configuration, there is a way of defining fuel or oxidizer
richness. This is done by using the concept of defined as

e.r = (ENV) 1 /(EN:Vi) ox

where N; is the number of atoms of elements, fuel or oxidizer and V;, the valencies
of the specific elements. Table 3.1 contains a list of valencies of various elements

19
