3 Chemistry and Stoichiometry

Table 3.1: Valencies of various elements
Element H,F,ClI O,S N,P,AlB
Valency 1 2 3

 

 

normally encountered in combustion phenomena For H>O- the formula gives e.r =
(2x 1)/(2 x 2) = 0.5 from which one can see it is fuel lean. Similarly

(er)Ne =(6x44+7x1)/(11 x2) =1.41; (e.r)nyc = 0.94

(e.r) NH, ClO, = (4 X 1)/(1 x14+4x 2) =0.44

As can be noticed, the values of equivalence ratio confirm the expected feature re-
garding fuel richness or otherwise.

Tables 3.2 and 3.3 give the स्टोइकोमेट्रिक ratio for a range of fuels with oxygen
or with air as the oxidizer. A few features are interesting to note. Those fuels which
have oxygen as an element in their structure will need smaller amount (weight) of
oxygen or air for combustion. Those involving greater amount of hydrogen will need
large amount (mass basis) of oxygen/air for combustion. The स्टोइकोमेट्रिक ratios
vary from about 2.5 to as much as 35.

Another feature emerges from the observation of the data on solid fuels. The
data with regard to solid fuels show that the composition of the fuels changes from
wood to anthracite coal by successive carbonization. The actual amount of oxy-
gen and hydrogen stripped from the starting material depends on the process that
occurs at high pressure and temperature inside earth. The net result is that the
oxygen-to-fuel ratio continues to rise from wood to coal as shown in Table 3.2. The
implications of स्टोइकोमेट्रिक ratio to combustion are very significant. If one were to
observe a flame from a burner which issues fuel gas into an otherwise undisturbed
atmosphere, one would find that a hydrogen flame at the same mass flow rate is
thirteen to fourteen times as long as that for carbon monoxide in the laminar range
of flow rates. (See Chapter 10 for further details). If in a confined atmosphere,
leakage takes place in the presence of a very hot spot, smaller amount of hydrogen
will consume up all air available in comparison to hydrocarbons.

3.1 Fuel? Oxidizer?

Till now we have been talking of fuels and oxidizers as though we know what they
are. Indeed how can we say what is oxidizer? Is oxygen always an oxidizer? Chem-
ically an oxidizer is defined as one which acquires electrons and fuel as the one
which can donate electrons. The various elements are categorized in terms of ei-
ther their richness in donating electrons or hunger in accepting electrons. Such a
table is called electronegativity table. Table 3.4 shows the Pauling’s electronegativ-
ity values in decreasing order. As can be seen, fluorine has the largest capability

20
