4 How Much Heat? How High a Temperature?

distances of possibly several kilometers around the meteorological station, but not
over larger scales—for instance a distance as large as that to the airport—because
temperature is not the same over this distance. All that this implies is that equi-
librium is said to occur over certain smaller scales in a system which by itself in
totality, is at non-equilibrium.

Consider a candle flame. The temperature measured through different parts
of the flame is significantly different. Yet we talk of temperature at a point. This
means that the total non-equilibrium system is split into a number of states which
can be described by equilibrium properties—pressure, temperature etc.

Thermodynamics, as distinct from mechanics, introduces an additional quantity
of state (equilibrium) needed for specifying a system—the temperature. Zeroth law
gives it a shape by indicating that several bodies in contact with each other are
said to be in thermodynamic equilibrium provided they have the same temperature.
Stated differently, a quantity called temperature has to be the same if systems in
physical contact are to be at equilibrium.

The first law summarizes the experience of life that energy can neither be cre-
ated nor destroyed but only transformed; that one cannot continue to extract heat
continuously without any other change in the system. Conceiving that all descrip-
tions require a system and surroundings and interactions between them, thermo-
dynamics distinguishes between those in which there is no mass, momentum and
heat transfer (called isolated systems) and those in which there is no mass transfer
but momentum and heat transfer can occur (called closed systems) and those in
which nothing is forbidden (called open system).

In the closed system one can conceive of a constant volume or constant pressure
system to state the limits. No work will be done in the case of a constant volume
system. Any heat transferred to this system (dg) will result in a raise in internal
energy (de) of the system, which in perfect gas is c,dT.

(dq)v=constant = de = c, dT 4.1)

where c¢, is called the constant volume specific heat = de/dT. In the systems where
pressure-volume work can be done—like a cylinder fitted with a piston at the top
and on which one can set weights to change the pressure, the transfer of heat into
the system causes a rise in internal energy along with the work required to move
the piston.

(dq) p=constant = de + pdv (4.2)

To treat such cases a quantity called एंथलपी (h) is defined as
h=e+ pv (4.3)
so that at constant pressure one gets

dh = de + pdv = (dq) p=constant (4.4)

24
