4 How Much Heat? How High a
Temperature?

Heat is intrinsically self-evident quantity which is experienced when a warm object
is touched, or say, when a person lights a fire in an open field in a cold climate for
warmth. To develop from this qualitative understanding of heat a scheme by which
quantities are measured, interrelated and predictions made requires the science of
thermodynamics. We need the major results of thermodynamics for finding the the
temperature and the composition of combustion products when fuel and oxidizer
burn. This subject is called chemical thermodynamics to emphasize the presence of
many species and their chemical interaction.

Thermodynamics deals with quantities of state at equilibrium — temperature,
internal energy, एंथलपी, entropy, availability and so on. In the true sense of its
description it is only thermostatics that attempts to answer certain questions con-
cerning transformations, but not the rate. The question of how fast heat is trans-
ferred from one point to another or how fast reaction takes place is outside the
purview of classical equilibrium thermodynamics (as it is called). One needs to
study non-equilibrium thermodynamics for this purpose. We shall presently review
the elements of thermodynamics for understanding the way flame temperature or
other equilibrium properties are calculated.

Firstly, what does the concept of equilibrium mean? It simply means that char-
acterizable properties do not change over space or time. For this definition to be
useful, the definition is modified to state that the properties do not change over ap-
propriate scales of space and time. To appreciate what this means, let us consider
an example.

It is quite often stated that the temperature of the northern hemisphere is a few
degrees more than that of the southern hemisphere, or that the peak temperature
at Bangalore or any other city is 25°C. Surely temperature over as large an area
as say, Bangalore is never the same. Even in a small area the temperature can
vary by as much as several degrees. So all that this statement implies is that in all
regions, which are shaded from sun, the measured temperature is about the same
as that measured at a meteorological station. However, the temperature quoted at
the airport for instance will be a few degrees different from that at the meteoro-
logical station. Thus one can say ‘temperature’ of Bangalore is at equilibrium over

23
