4 How Much Heat? How High a Temperature?

or

YM = Xi) M (4.13)

Summing up Eqn. (4.12) over all i, one gets
My = SX iM, (4.14)

the average molecular weight.

Summing up Eqn. (4.13) over all i gives an alternate but equivalent expression
for .#
M = [SY] AM) (4.15)

The properties ¢ and h defined earlier can be obtained for a mixture given that for
individual species e = Xe;Y; or Ye; X;

depending on whether e; and h; are given in mass or molar units, i.e. one can give
e; and h; in kJ/kg or kJ/mole. The expression with weighting of mass fraction is to
be used if kJ/kg units for e; or h; are used. The above relations (4.16) are valid for
specific heats, entropies and Gibbs free energies (to be treated later). The एंथलपी
of any species is composed of two parts. One of this is the sensible एंथलपी. This is a
function of temperature alone and is the integral of specific heat with temperature.

The values of specific heat are obtained from measurements and used in the above
expression to obtain the enthalpies. If the temperature includes a phase transition
like vaporisation, the एंथलपी of vaporisation is to be introduced as follows.

Thoiting T
hs; (T) = / cpidT + L + / cpidT (4.18)
Tres Thoiting

where L is the latent heat of vaporisation.

The second part of एंथलपी due to the chemical and physical state of the sub-
stance, called the heat of formation, is due to differences in एंथलपी between differ-
ent species at the same temperature. If there were no such differences one would
not have exothermic reactions (and therefore, flames). The heat of formation is
essentially the heat of a reaction (which is a general form of the term heat of com-
bustion) but, in a special reaction. It is the heat of reaction in a reaction in which
the species alone is the product and the component elements of the species are the
only reactants at standard state (standard state is 298.16 K, 0.1 M Pa). The heat
of formation of the reactants at standard state is set to zero while compiling the
tables of the complete data on heats of formation (denoted by A ;).

26
