4.5 Can we raise the peak temperature from a given reactant set?

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Main Process “600K
Unit A
I
|
of -————— a —
po! gr «— [uel
400 - 700 K
AI «— Air
Heat |
Up to 700K increment Exchanger
in Tadiot y
Fuel Air
300K

Figure 4.4: Schematic of an arrangement to raise the peak temperature of a fuel-oxidizer
combination

Such a geometry is essentially a sphere. Increasing the combustion throughput or
power in such a spherical combustor reduces the role of heat loss in determining
the peak temperature achieved in the combustor. The heat losses can contribute to
the observed reduction in temperature by a few hundred Kelvin.

Thus, both the above factors can reduce the observed temperatures in actual
systems by several hundred Kelvin.

4.5 Can we raise the peak temperature from a given
reactant set?

This question becomes relevant in industries that use low quality fuels but intend
to perform thermal operation requiring high temperature like the glazing opera-
tion on ceramic material or melting of iron. In the former case at least 1350 K
is required and in the latter at least 1600 K is required. If we are using a fuel—
oxidant mixture that generates 1100 K, how can we achieve the objectives noted
above? Figure 4.4 shows the schematic of how this can be achieved. The fuel-
oxidant mixture is burnt in two locations, with the hot gas from the first location
being used in a heat exchanger to preheat the oxidant alone or the fuel as well be-
fore being used in the second combustion system. Since the entry conditions for the
second combustion system have reactants at sufficiently high temperature (even up
to 800 K depending on the quality of the heat exchanger), it is possible to raise the
temperature even up to 1700 K. In many practical situations, the waste heat from
the process itself can be used for preheating the reactants, either in part or com-
pletely. This is true for many metal melting industries designed and built at a time
when fuel was considered cheap and the burnt gases were simply sent up into the

41
