4 How Much Heat? How High a Temperature?

mixture H,—LOX fuel rich causes an increase in 7 /.# even though T; decreases
because .# decreases even more when the mixture becomes more fuel-rich. This
fact is made use of in LOX-LH> engine where the operating oxidizer to fuel ratio
is only 4.5 to 5 even though the स्टोइकोमेट्रिक ratio is 8. The flame temperature is
reduced, which reduces the thermal problem on the engine.

4.4 Theoretical vs. measured flame temperature

It is useful to examine as to what extent does theory replicate reality, for it is of-
ten thought that theory is always very distant from reality. The word “theoretical”
itself has several levels. The first is the adiabatic flame temperature. This does
not involve flow aspects. The next aspect includes fluid flow effects that influence
the flame temperature through stretch (or straining of flame surfaces). Thirdly,
there are heat losses by the system with flame to the surroundings. Inference
from flame temperature measurements should accpont fof these aspects. When it
is asked whether the adiabatic flame temperature computed by the procedure out-
lined earlier is realized in actual practice, it is to be understood that stretch effects
are excluded. What is this quantity called stretch that we are talking of?

One can expect that in a complex flow field, the fluid elements will move in
various directions. A flame is expected to be stretched if there is change in fluid
velocity in a direction parallel to the flame surface. One also talks of strain rates
somewhat synonymously. This stretch can be positive or negative. Positive stretch
makes the flame thinner. Negative stretch makes the flame thicker. When a flame
is flat and the premixed fluid flows through the flame in a direction normal to it,
one would have an unstrained flame. This is an ideal flame discussed in chapter 6.
In a classical Bunsen flame, the region near the top where the flame is curved, one
experiences negative stretch (also called compressive strain rate) and the conical
region below this segment experiences positive stretch. In a complex flow field, the
flame surface could move unsteadily and curve up in various directions, leading
to various strains being imposed on the flame. If one measures the temperature
in the burnt zone just after a flat flame, one would really measure the adiabatic
flame temperature corresponding to the mixture ratio of premixed mixture. If one
measures the temperatures in a conical (Bunsen) flame one will find stretch is to
reduce the flame speed’ or the local consumption rate and at extreme stretch, there
could be flame extinction as well. If the flame is turbulent, one could have flame
extinguishment at several locations at different instants leading to temperature
fluctuations from the ambient value to high temperature largely because of these
effects.

The effect of heat losses will be severe in small systems and lesser in larger
systems - the governing factor would be a geometry which minimizes the surface
area that contributes to heat loss but has necessary volume to release the heat.

40
