4 How Much Heat? How High a Temperature?

Table 4.6: The effects of changes in sign of Ah and As

 

 

Type Ah As Ag Conclusion

1 negative positive negative A probable reaction
(exother- at all temperatures
mic)

2 negative negative negative Probable reaction at

atlowT low T but improba-
ble at high T

3 positive positive negative A probable reaction
(en- at high at high 7 but not
dother- T probable at low T°
mic)

4 positive negative positive Improbable reaction

at all 7. The reverse
reaction 1s most
probable

 

> (40.1 kJ/mol) /(0.1075 kJ/mol K) = 373.0 K

Thus, at T' > 100°C, vaporisation of water is a natural process (at boiling point, a
fact all of us are familiar with).

Whether the reaction is natural or not depends on एंथलपी changes as well as
entropy changes. Table 4.6 indicates the qualitative behaviour of reactions under
various conditions. An example of type 1 is the one already illustrated. All associa-
tion reactions (H + OH — HO, for example) are most probable at low temperatures
but not so at high temperatures (Type 2). Type 3 is the opposite of association re-
actions, i.e., dissociation reactions of the type CO; — CO + (1/2)O2 which are more
probable at high temperatures and not so at low temperatures. Type 4 is opposite
of Type 1.

We now proceed to answer the second question. To do this we need a basic rela-
tionship concerning the dependence of Gibbs free energy on pressure, very simply
obtained from integration of the differential relationship like g; = gf + RT Inp; (per
unit mole).

Applied to a species in a mixture, this amounts to
gi=¢ + RTInp (per unit mole)

g; = free energy at p; = 1 atm. It is a function of temperature.

We now consider reactions at equilibrium. At equilibrium, the rates of forward
reactions must equal those of reverse reactions so that there is no net production or
destruction of any species. During the transition from initial state to equilibrium
the Gibbs free energy (at constant total pressure and temperature) will decrease

32
