6 Premixed Flames

Premixed flames are those generated when the fuel and the oxidizer are mixed be-
fore letting them into the combustion zone. They are not common in nature because
if they were, there would have been serious fire hazards.

6.1 Propagating flames

In Fig. 6.1 (a), a glass tube is initially filled with premixed gaseous mixture of fuel
and oxidizer, say air, and sparked by using a high voltage source. After the mixture
is sparked, a flame will propagate through the mixture. The flame will be plane in
the early stages and becomes curved as it passes further. The flame becomes curved
because of the viscous effect of the glass tube. The speed at which the flame would
propagate into the mixture if it is one dimensional is called flame speed ( S,).

In Fig. 6.1 (b), the apparatus contains rotameters to measure the flow rate, and a
mixer to mix the fuel and air and pass the mixture so that it attains uniform velocity
at the exit. If the mixture is sparked, a flame which is plane and thin would remain
nearly stationary. The velocity of the unburned fuel-air mixture entering the flame
when it is stationary is the flame speed denoted normally by S,, the subscript u
referring to the unburnt condition. This situation is similar to the one described
earlier excepting that in (a) the gases are quiescent and flame propagates and in (b)
flame is stationary and gases are moving in. In apparatus (b), the fuel and air flow
rates can be varied so that the air-to-fuel ratio can be varied and the flame speed
measured (one can also vary the air-to-fuel ratio in Fig. 6.1 (a); it is not shown
here). At mixture ratios far from stoichiometry, the flame speed reduces to very
small values and eventually at very lean and very rich mixtures, the flame does not
propagate at all. These lean and rich mixture ratios are called flammability limits.
Figure 6.1 (c) represents flame over a Bunsen Burner. As the flow rate increases,
the flame becomes a deeper conical one. The velocity of incoming gases along a
direction normal to the flame is the flame speed. If the flow rate is increased, the
flame adjusts itself such that the speed of incoming gases normal to the flame will
still be the flame speed.

Typical flame speeds are about 0.30-0.5 m/s for hydrocarbon-air fuels, about 2.0
m/s for Ho—air and 10 m/s for Ho—O, flames near stoichiometry. The peak flame

51
