5 How Does a Reaction Proceed? At What Rate?

@p

H

 

 

TL ee (7) see TT
XI

H
H

Jor Jeo

Figure 5.2: Propane molecule

©

a reaction to take place. One can now ask what fraction of molecules have energy
greater than or equal to E. The Boltzmann energy distribution law states that the
probability of a molecule possessing energy FE is proportional to exp(—E/RT'). More
elaborate study obtains expression for probability of molecules possessing energy
equal to and larger than FE to be approximately exp(—E/RT). Thus, the reactants
(in a true situation, the single step molecular event in a large number of s) have
to have energy larger than E for reaction to be successful and the fraction of such
molecules is exp — FE /RT. This dependence is also termed Arrhenius law. Thus, the
reaction rate can be taken to be

RR = AX) Xop?e B/ET (5.2)

The quantity Ay, is called frequency factor and is a constant. It is proportional
to collision frequency, the number of collisions per unit time. The study of chem-
ical reactions this way is not special to combustion alone. Chemical engineers do
deal with reaction rates but mostly isothermal. Biochemical reactions take place at
temperatures near ambient temperature. In fact, most microorganisms die beyond
80-90°C. It is only in combustion that temperature range of 300-3600 K is experi-
enced in a single system like a flame. A; is estimated from kinetic theory based on
collisions; it is molecular density and the relative orientation of the participating
species which is given by what is known as steric factor. Consider the example of
an H atom colliding with a propane molecule. One can notice in Fig 5.1 that there
are several paths of approach that the H atom can take when it attacks a large
molecule like propane. Since the bond strength between various atoms is different,
the ability of H atom to break up the propane molecule is different along the differ-
ent orientations shown. Hence the reaction rate will get affected by the orientation
of the molecule in the reaction. In a complex situation, the Steric factor could be as
small as 1072. For a general reaction,

46
