6.2 Why are we interested so much in Flame Speeds?

Let us consider the question of importance of flame speeds in combustion pro-
cesses. Several phenomena like ignition, quenching, lifting and blow-off of diffusion
flames, blow-off of high-speed premixed mixtures are all related to chemical reac-
tivity of a gaseous mixture. These can therefore be directly related to the burning
velocity of a mixture. In situations where chemical reactivity is to be treated, one
can use the flame speed as the representative quantity. If a solid propellant is burn-
ing in one-dimensional geometry, then the configuration is similar to the flame in
gaseous media excepting that a solid interface is accepting the heat transfer from
flame and burning. The quantity S,, = p,7 where p, = density of the solid and 7 the
linear burn rate, can be treated by similar approach. If a porous bed of pieces of
solid fuel (like bio-fuel or coal) is burning with the flow of air through the bed, the
flame front propagates through the bed against the air flow. This process is similar
to the propagation behavior in gaseous fuel-oxidizer mixtures.

While the simple analysis described above is adequate to understand the over-
all features, much effort is needed to elucidate the dependence of flame speed on
pressure. This is because what is being done is to relate the pressure index of the
flame speed to reaction rate pressure index, something which is unknown because
the reaction proceeds in several tepss and it is not clear a-priori which of the steps
is/are important.

In order to take complex kinetics into account, one needs to solve conservation
equations, involving mass, momentum and energy, in general. In respect of de-
flagaration (subsonic flame propagation) it is adequate to solve species (mass) and
energy conservation equations. The conservation equations of many species being
formed or destroyed via various s are solved on a computer which results in flame
speed, temperature and mass fraction profiles. Computation performed for several
pressures will reveal the pressure index. The resulting profile can also be used to
obtain the overall heat release rates as a function of local temperature. One can
then determine the reactivity of the gaseous mixture. Figure 6.4 shows the plots
for Ho—O> and hydrocarbon—air systems. It can be seen that peak heat release
rates are as high as 10° — —107 MW /m3. Referring back to Fig 6.1, wherein various
geometries of premixed flame are shown, it is possible that the flames could be pro-
duced with large ducts and at reasonably high velocities as well. In such cases the
flames no longer remain laminar. High speed pictures will show combustion zones
randomly moving around; the flame will be noisy as well. Such flames are said to
be affected by turbulence. Turbulence begins to play a significant role in ducts for
Reynolds numbers larger than 2300 or so. The Reynolds numbers are calculated
based on mass flux through the duct pu, (where p is the density and is the velocity
of the gas mixture), duct diameter, d, and viscosity of gases issuing out of the duct
(1) (Re = pud/p). Turbulence is characterized by intensity and scale. Intensity is
essentially the ratio of root mean square of fluctuating velocity to mean local veloc-
ity (y/u/?/u). Scale refers to the length scale or distance of influence of fluctuations
at any point. It is usually defined using correlations between fluctuations of veloc-

55
