7 Inflammability, Quenching

If you notice the left hand side region, the curve is approaching very small flame
speed at fuel fraction of 5% (by volume). This is typically about 0.02 m/s. Similarly,
on the rich side, the curve drops down to very small values at fuel fraction of 15%.
The flammability limits may therefore be taken to lie between 5-15% for methane—
air at ambient temperature. An important question concerning these values has
been raised in literature. If we have treat an adiabatic flame propagation, would
there be limits or would the propagation occur at any mixture strength?

It is indeed true to say that adiabatic flame should be capable of propagation
at any mixture ratio. This fact has been proved by systematic calculation of the
propagational behavior. In reality however, there are heat losses—the irreducible
heat loss due to radiation from the flame. If one calculates the propagation speed
as a function of mixture strength, one finds that the difference between the speeds
without and with heat loss is very small at stoichiometry (about 2 %) and increases
towards the lean and rich conditions. At the low propagational speeds, the energy
present in the flame is so small that relatively small heat loss is enough to quench
the flame. One can impose natural heat loss behavior and calculate the limits.
These match with the observed limits. Some typical values of flammability limits
are given in Table 7.1.

It may be noticed from Table 7.1 that: the limits get enlarged because of oxygen
essentially due to greater reactivity; that in the case of acetylene the upper limit
is 100% because acetylene is exothermically decomposable by itself; hydrogen has
very wide limits compared to hydrocarbons due to its higher reactivity; the upper
limit (rich) is about 2—4 times the stoichiometry; the lower limit (lean limit) is about
30-60% of the stoichiometry.

The limits get enlarged at higher initial temperatures. The lean limit remains
unaltered because of increase of pressure. The upper limit is enhanced substan-
tially at higher pressures. The data on Table 7.1 and the discussion in then earlier
paragraph imply that the behaviour is different for lean and rich operating condi-
tions. These are due to chemical kinetic effects which should be taken into account
along with heat losses if the predictions are to be realistic. While simple theories
explain many observed features qualitatively, computational studies with realistic
chemistry and multi-dimensional geometry have captured many observed features.

7.1 Quenching

Quenching is an extension of flammability limits. Suppose one k conducting the ex-
periment on flammability limits with cylindrical tubes of successively lower diam-
eter. The flammability limits remain about the same till a certain value, typically
about 20 mm or so. Below this diameter, if the duct size is reduced, then the limits
begin approaching each other till a stage comes when the flame will not propagate
at all at any mixture ratio. This diameter at which flame will not propagate at all

60
