7 Inflammability, Quenching

Suppose you had to light an LPG gas stove manually. You would possibly use a
mechanical spark igniter. You would open the valve on the front and cause the
spark a few seconds later. Unless you time the spark properly, the gas would not
ignite. You do it a few times at various locations around the gas exit region. At
one moment you may find that the entire gas mixture ignites. Also, if you open
the valve and start the sparking operation too late near the gas exit region, you
would not achieve any success. What is it that is happening? The gas will ignite
and flame will stabilize provided the mixture is neither too rich nor too lean in the
spark region. If you sparked too early (after you complete the operation of opening
the valve) the gas would not have arrived at the spark region after mixing with air
and so the mixture will possibly be too lean to ignite. If you sparked too late, the
mixture of fuel and air issuing out of the gas outlet would possibly be too fuel-rich
and so it would not ignite at all.

To give another example, if the valve of a gas stove or gas cylinder is inadver-
tently left open (or leaks), gas accumulation takes place in a confined area. Some-
where around the viscinity there is a naked flame. A short while after leakage
is noticed, and before any corrective action can be taken, the whole gas is up in
flames. In this situation the leaked gas would be mixing with air and the mixture
which would be moving around possibly due to ambient wind encounters an excel-
lent ignition source and the gas (in the appropriate mixture ratio range) ignites.

In both these cases, the essential feature is that the gas mixture is inflammable
only over a limited range of mixture ratios. Inflammability limits are the range of
fuel-oxidant mixture ratios within which a flame can propagate and beyond which
flame cannot propagate. It is experimentally measured by a rather simple appara-
tus. A long tube (10-12 times the diameter in length) typically of 40—60 mm diame-
ter (diameter cannot be too small) is filled with a mixture of chosen mixture ratio. It
is sparked at the top, middle, or bottom. If the flame propagates, then the mixture
ratio is moved further to lean or rich side. That mixture ratio at which flame hes-
itates to propagate (or does not just propagate) is the inflammability limit. There
are slight differences between results of upward and downward flame propagation.
But we will not consider these.

For instance, consider the results of methane—air mixture as shown in Fig. 6.2.

59
