6.3 Overview

An approximate expression for the ratio of diffusivities is quoted as 0.01 Re and
SO
S1/Su = di /d; = \/(0.01Re) = 0.1Re'/? (6.8)

Thus, at high Reynolds number (~ 10%), the turbulent flame can be ten times as
thick and propagate ten times as fast as a laminar flame. While these overall re-
sults are quite in agreement with experimental observations, the foundations are
by no means sound. For instance, it is not clear why the reaction rates in turbulent
range should be the same as for laminar range. This is an area of current research
where theoretical description is refined to predict details of flame structure in ad-
dition to overall results.

Laminar flames are often understood to be only of theoretical importance and
that turbulent flames that are of practical relevance. This is not true. Laminar
flames are also of practical importance. Solid propellant combustion processes occur
at length scales of a ten to hundred microns with gas efflux velocities of a few m/s.
With viscosity being high due to high temperatures (of 1000 to 2000 K), the effective
Reynolds number of the flow is 10 to 100. The flows coming out of the propellant
surface would be unsteady, but laminar. Flame quenching (see the next chapter)
is a process that occurs at dimensions and velocities that are in the laminar flow
regime. A new subject called micro-combustion process being evolved now occurs in
the laminar flow regime.

6.3 Overview

This chapter has dealt with laminar flames. Flames propagating at constant speed
can be treated as stationary by reversing the inflow at the speed required to main-
tain the steady behavior. The speed at which the unburnt mixture approaches the
steady flame is termed the burning velocity and it characterises the chemical reac-
tivity of the mixture. The propagation speeds are weakly dependent on the pres-
sure, but strongly on the initial temperature of the mixture. Reducing the dilution
increases the propagation speed. Premixed combustion process behavior dominates
the combustion of double-base propellants at all pressures and composite propel-
lants at low pressure. The specific qualification in terms of pressure arises from
the consideration that the propellant ingredients are in a molecularly mixed state
in double base propellants and the length scales of combustion at low pressure are
large compared to the particle sizes in a composite propellant. Turbulent flames
burning in some regimes can be treated as wrinkled laminar flames. In fine scale
highly-turbulent combustion, turbulence interacts deeply with reaction process.

57
