7.1 Quenching

produces gases at high pressure. These gases act on the surface of water in the
chamber and so the water is ejected. The products of decomposition of hydrazine
are ammonia, hydrogen and nitrogen. This mixture, at a temperature of about 400—
500°C, mixes with air in the ballast tanks. Pressures are anywhere between 2.5-3.0
M Pa (25-30 times the ambient pressure). It is not immediately clear if the mixture
will ignite in the environment. If it ignites, the results would be disastrous. Exam-
ination of data in the light of knowledge of flammability limits indicates that the
possibility of ignition cannot be ruled out. Experimental evidence indicates a high
incidence of ignition (and explosion) in several tests made at various conditions.

Similarly, quenching has several useful practical aspects. Several chemical in-
dustries deal with hydrogen and hydrogen—air or other mixtures. In industries,
these gases are handled at fairly high flow rates. If there happens to be ignition
anywhere, the flame will propagate (at as much as 1.5-2.5 m/s for hydrogen—Air
system) throughout the system and may enter a large hold of gas and cause ex-
plosion. In all such cases, it is important to isolate various systems so that the
possibility of flame in any one region does not affect the other units/systems. For
designing flame isolators, one needs to use the information on quench distances.
Two systems, if connected through a large number of parallel tubes each of diam-
eter less than quench distance (the large number is to provide for adequate total
cross sectional area) and preferably made of high conductivity material, would be-
come decoupled because flame cannot cross from one to the other.

A somewhat similar design has been used to design a flare to burn combustible
gases from a biomass gasification system. This system needs to be used certainly
at the first start-up, and in emergency shutdowns and also at other times required
during the plant operation. While under normal conditions combustible gas with-
out any oxidant is the only gas that passes through the system, it may turn out that
some leakages have developed during its life which may create a good combustible
mixture passing through the system. If, at the time when the flare is operating
emergency shutdown occurs, the average speed through the system k falling and at
some time it can go below the flame speed. At this time the flame will propagate up-
stream and can cause undesired combustion in large volumes of gaseous mixtures,
if present, leading to thermal explosion. Figure 7.1 shows the schematic of this de-
sign. The gas from a duct is divided into two, four (or more, if needed) paths and the
exit occurs from a rectangular section where width is smaller than the quench dis-
tance. The total cross-sectional area is made comparable to the gaseous inlet area
so as not to cause any additional pressure drop in the line. The gases coming out
of the rectangular slots can be ignited and the flame maintained. If the exit veloci-
ties are large enough to blow the flame off, this can be countered by maintaining a
meshed structure to enable flame to be stablized outside. If, now, the blower (or any
other source) delivering the gases is turned down or off, the flame tends to move
back (flash back). This movement is prevented by the small cross-section where the
flame extinguishes since the heat generation rate is inadequate to overcome the

63
