8 Ignition

to flash a flame and consume the vapours. If the ignition source is taken away,
the flame also will disappear. Stated differently, the flame is not self-supporting at
the flash point. At fire point, any ignition makes the flame over the pool become
self supporting. Following ignition, the heat transferred by the flame will generate
enough volatiles to continue burning in the gas phase. Igniting solid fuels is even
more difficult. Consequently, if a person wants to light a wood stove, she would
douse the ends of fire wood sticks with some kerosene and then light the piece.
It is not always for sure that if you ignite the stick with kerosene the wood stick
would ignite for the kerosene could burn away leaving the wood unignited. How
ignition works with dousing of kerosene is as follows. Firstly, it must be understood
that kerosene is the first to vaporise because its boiling point is about 150-200 °C.
Volatiles from wood would get generated only at 300-350 °C. Hence it is kerosene
which would burn away first. But during this process, transfer of heat by radiation
and conduction close to the flame should begin to generate volatiles from the wood
and then combust it. If this process becomes self-sustaining before the kerosene
burns away, the process of ignition is successful. For instance, if you had doused
the wood pieces with gasoline instead of kerosene, there would be less chances of
ignition of wood. This is because gasoline would burn away faster and the chances
that wood would generate volatiles within this time are lower. In fact many a crim-
inal has been unsuccessful in burning away incriminating documents by dousing
them with gasoline for he had not understood combustion principles!

It is not that one needs to use kerosene for ignition. One can ignite wood by
itself—not of course a log of large diameter. This is because the ignition source
expectedly small, is not able to persuade regions of wood to release volatiles in a
sustained manner. The heat transferred is shared by the larger portions in conduc-
tion mode and the heat is simply dissipated. Therefore, one needs to use a large
number of small-sized fibrous dry sticks and ignite them with a matchstick. The
fibrous wood pieces, particularly the sharp-edged ones, will ignite immediately and
the entire bunch will start burning. They can then be put on the grate of a stove
and by suitably adding additional wood pieces of slightly larger sizes, the fire can
be maintained. The energy utilized here will be close to 20 to 40 J.

8.2 Matchstick composition and ignition

The common matchstick is used in many kitchens in many countries, even though
it has gone out-of-vogue in other countries in favor of lighters and quartz crystal
based sparking devices. The composition used on the matchstick ignites on being
rubbed against a special surface (as it happens in safety matches) and holds the
flame for a time that would be needed to light a kerosene wick stove or a cigarette
or other combustible substances. The wood used for the matchstick is chosen so
as to be porous enough to absorb various chemicals, and rigid enough to withstand

68
