8.3 Ignition in Reciprocating Engines

the bending forces encountered when the match is struck. The trees whose trunk
is used for this purpose are usually white pine and aspen. With an automated
process, the wood is veneered (thin slices of wood come out in the form of a sheet)
and matchsticks are cut. In many cases, these are soaked in ammonium phosphate
to act as a fire retardant. This prevents the stick from smoldering after the match
has gone out. The striking end of the matchstick is dipped in hot paraffin wax to
provide a small amount of fuel to transfer the flame from the burning chemicals on
the tip to the matchstick itself.

The matchsticks come in the form of strike-anywhere match and safety matches.
Safety matches are those that embed the safety in two ways: (a) they have two
components that need to be used to cause a flame. The matchstick has a composition
on its head and a surface that is separate from the stick, a different composition and
(b) the very highly reactive white phosphorous that was used earlier is replaced by
red phosphorous. The striking of the matchstick against the surface causes the
generation of frictional heat; this is sufficient to cause the ignition that involves, as
an initial step, the conversion of a trace of red phosphorous to white phosphorous.

The compositions of the matchhead and the striking surface are not unlike those
used in igniter compositions of rocket engines. Only, they are less expensive and
less reactive. The match head is typically composed of 45-55 % potassium chlorate,
with a little sulphur and starch, a neutralizer (ZnO or CaCO3), 20-40 % of siliceous
filler or powdered glass, diatomiticous earth and animal glue. Some heads contain
antimony (III) sulfide so they burn more vigorously. The striking surface is com-
posed of typically 25 % powdered glass, 50 % red phosphorus, 5% neutralizer, 4 %
carbon black and 16 % binder. Powdered glass aids the friction to generate heat.
Inert fillers are added to give sufficient mass to maintain the fire for the required
time. Typical mass of the composition on the matchhead is about 5 to 10 mg and
its calorific value is about 1.5 to 2.0 J/g. Thus the energy of a matchstick head is
about 6 to 20 J.

8.3 Ignition in Reciprocating Engines

Spark Ignition Engines In engines that use gasoline fuel, the carburettor mixes the
fuel spray with air and sends it on to the engine combustion chamber. After
the mixture is ingested into the chamber, at an appropriate moment in the
cycle in relation to top dead centre, a spark is fired so that the ignition occurs.
The spark is created by a voltage source of 3-5 kV.

Compression Ignition Engines In such engines which use diesel fuel, the pressure
ratio used is high (~15-20) so that compression causes the temperature to
raise to such an extent that when liquid injection takes place, it can ignite
by itself under the conditions of high pressure and temperature. One of the
important requirements in such engines is that ignition must take place very

69
