8 Ignition

fast. The typical time available for combustion in an engine running at say
1500 rpm, is about 2—4 ms. This requires the droplet to be very fine—which
indeed it is. The other condition is for environmental condition to permit igni-
tion in the time scale of the kind indicated.

8.4 Ignition in Rocket Engines

It has already been indicated that there exists combination of liquid fuels and ox-
idizers which on mixing will react and burst into flame. These are the hypergolic
combinations. When the liquids are mixed, the liquid phase reactions (between
UDMH and NO, or NoH, and RFNA, for example) at the interface between the
liquids is such that very reactive species are produced which enter the gas phase
and react exothermically leading to high temperature flame. While this feature
is true in most combustion reactions, the essential point concerns the rate of re-
actions. The rate of reactions here is so large that the time between mixing and
occurance of a gaseous flame is as small as 3-10 ms. This duration between start
of mixing to burst of flame is called the ignition delay. Thus, even at extremely low
pressures, when the gas phase reactions can be expected to be slow, the reactions
are completed in as small a time as 20-30 ms and ignition is indeed smooth. It is
for this reason that most rocket engines that need high reliability like the lunar
module engine, for instance, use only hypergolic combinations.

There are rocket engines based on liquid oxygen-liquid hydrogen (LOX-LH>)
mixtures. These engines use igniters which by themselves are small rockets ignited
by spark. Figure 8.1 shows schematically the arrangement for such an engine.
Similar arrangements need to be made for LOX-kerosene engine. Such engines
can also be made restartable if needed.

8.5 Ignition for Solid Rocket Engines

In solid rocket engines there is a solid propellant (configured geometrically prop-
erly) which needs to be ignited. Figure 8.2 shows two arrangements of propellant
and ignition scheme.

In relatively small rockets, ignition is caused by an igniter charge which consists
of pellets of appropriate composition—similar to the main propellant, but with more
metal loading. A typical composition may be like 50 % ammonium perchorate (AP),
35 % boron or titanium and 15 % polymer. The ignition is usually electrical—a fine
wire coated with a heat sensitive explosive such as lead azide or mercuric fulminate
causes ignition when an electrical current, typically 0.75-1 amp is passed through
the wire. The heat sensitive material explodes and this causes the main charge to
burn fast (in about 10-30 ms). The products are gases and hot metal and metal

70
