8 Ignition

It is a matter of experience that a fuel gas can be ignited in an easier manner than
a kerosene wick which in turn is easier than a solid fuel in stoves using these fuels.
Since ignition implies a flame in gaseous phase, one has to generate fuel vapours
from liquid/solid before ignition can take place. This is why it is easier to ignite a
gaseous fuel. It is more difficult to vaporise a solid compared to a liquid and that is
the reason for greater difficulty in igniting solid fuels.

Aircraft engines use kerosene as a fuel. Kerosene is usually injected as a fine
spray into the combustion chamber. Ignition is performed by a spark source. It
must be noted that the flow velocities in the combustor are by no means small,
typically 20-50 m/s. Hence it is quite difficult to re-ignite under these conditions.
Let us assume that ignition has taken place and the aircraft has flown into cruise
altitude. Suppose the aircraft moves into a zone of heavy rain and water ingestion
causes a ‘flame-out’ as it is called. It should be possible to re-ignite the system at
this altitude and at reasonable flight speeds. This is a tough task and if achieved,
makes the engine qualify for acceptance by aircraft as a propulsion system. To
find how much must be the energy of the spark to cause ignition in such conditions
and where to locate the spark in the flowing fluid requires an understanding of the
processes of ignition.

We begin now to try and understand the processes during ignition. There are
two methods of ignition— (i) high energy spark, (ii) a naked flame. The high en-
ergy spark is created between two electrodes kept at some distance away from each
other. Generating a high voltage across the electrodes (typically of the order of 10
kV) causes a breakdown of the resistance in the gaseous atmosphere and the re-
gion between the electrodes is filled with ions and high energy species. The local
temperatures are also high. These high energy species diffuse to the surroundings,
recombine at a distance and generate heat. The chemical reactions begin in the en-
tire region around the spark. Whether these reactions decay away or sustain into
a propagating flame will depend on the relative levels of energy generated locally
to that which is diffused away. The minimum energy required can be estimated
by calculating the energy of a flame with thickness equal to flame thickness and a
cross-section of a dimension equal to quench distance. The logic for this comes from
the following observation. If the energy of the spark is restricted to the cross-section
equal to or less than the quench distance corresponding to the gas—air mixture, the

65
