8.1 Ignition of a Liquid Pool and solid fuels

about thirty times this value, 1-2 mJ. If now we superpose the effect of flowing
stream at velocities ~20-50 m/s, the energy goes up substantially. While actual
calculations can indeed be made, the typical ratio of ignition energies with flow
compared to that at quiescent conditions, is about 100 or so. This brings the ignition
energy in the range of 0.1 J or so. Typical values of ignition energies in spark
igniters of aircraft engines are about 1-2 J and this is consistent with the fact that
in aircraft engines, ignition is of kerosene spray (of fine droplets) and not gaseous
fuel.

Ignition by a naked flame is always easier than a spark. This is because the
flame has a copious amount of active radicals at reasonably high temperature and
even a match stick flame carries with it energy of as much as 20-50 J. Thus the
energy available for ignition is very large. Of course, one will not be able to use
a simple flame in relatively high speed streams because the flame gets quenched
(why? See Chapter 9 on extinction and stability of flames). A spark is a very stable
source of energy especially since it is tiny and can be arranged easier. This does not
mean pilot flame ignition is not used in practice. It is indeed used even in rocket
engines. The pilot flame is spark ignited and it becomes the ignition source for a
much larger system.

8.1 Ignition of a Liquid Pool and solid fuels

Under unforeseen contingencies it may happen that liquid pool gets formed. A
typical instance could be the breaking up of a fuel tanker at sea. The entire liquid
fuel spreads on the sea surface. During the breaking up, should an unwanted fire
get created, the entire liquid pool could go up in flames or be not in a position
to be burnt-up, a condition less desired under such circumstances, because of the
environmental hazards. So we ask a question: Under what conditions does a pool
of liquid ignite?

Suppose one were to take a burning matchstick near a pool of kerosene. You
may find that the kerosene will not ignite at all. You may then take the burning
stick near a small pool of gasoline and be surprised by the speed of ignition. You
might further provoke the kerosene pool by simply inserting the cinder of burning
stick into the pool to find a few whitish vapours on a gasoline pool,escaping into the
atmosphere. Then even a small flame brought near the pool would quickly ignite
and burn away the vapours obtained a little earlier. What do all these mean? For
ignition one needs fuel vapours. In the case of kerosene the boiling point is high
and so vapours are found in small quantities in the region above the pool. On the
other hand, one will find more vapours on a gasoline pool even at temperatures
of 20-25°C. Therefore, bringing any tiny source of ignition is adequate to cause
ignition. These aspects are covered under the concepts of flash and fire points.

Flash point is the temperature of the liquid at which an ignition source is able

67
