9 Stability, Extinction and Blow-Off of
Flames

Stability is a concept used in many scientific disciplines. Invariably it means that
the system in static or dynamic equilibrium gets restored to equilibrium on being
displaced slightly from its original state. This interpretation is also appropriate
for flames. There are many situations where the flame— premixed or diffusion—is
subject to disturbances. If, innspite of these disturbances, the flame gets restored
to the original state when the disturbances are removed, then, the flame is said to
be stable.

Let us first look at situations where the subject is relevant. Figure 9.1 shows
several such situations. The unstable flames may move to one of the more stable
states— the no-flame state. In this case the flame is thought to be ‘extinguished’ or
blown off.

In Fig. 9.1 (a) is shown a classical Bunsen burner used in chemical laboratories
or glass blowing units. It is quite often run on kerosene vapour and sometimes with
LPG. When one runs out of either of these, acetylene is used. At comparable flow
rates one may find that the flame flashes back in the case of acetylene—air mixture
when it would not for LPG or perhaps kerosene-vapour—air mixture. If one had
designed the system for acetylene—air, then allowing kerosene vapour—air to flow
through causes the flame to blow off at the same flow rate. We should understand
why?

In Fig. 9.1 (b) the combustion chamber of a gas turbine engine is indicated.
The combustion chamber of a gas turbine engine has to function over a wide range
of fuel-air mixture ratios and pressures (sometimes even below sea level pressure).
The speed of the high pressure air flow through the system does not vary during the
operation. One would like to ensure that in the operating range of the parameters,
the flame is stable. In case (¢), we have a candle flame or a matchstick flame.
Candle flame represents an example of a diffusion flame. The initial flame from the
matchstick on the other hand, represents the case close to premixed flame, as it has
oxidizer in the match composition. In both cases, a child can extinguish the flame
by blowing air. The same fluid-air which supports combustion also can deactivate
it. Why is it so?

73
