9 Stability, Extinction and Blow-Off of Flames

from Tj to Ty. The steady heat balance gives
mep(Ty — To) = wi vH 9.1)

where v is the volume of the reactor, c, = specific heat of the gases. One way of
representing the overall reaction rate is as follows:

wy = Age B/2RTy (Tyo _ Ty)" f(A/F)p" 9.2)

Here Ay is the frequency factor, p" represents pressure term, n being the reaction
order (~ 1.8-2.4), the exponential term due to activation energy. (Ty, — Ty) is repre-
sentative of the mass fraction of fuel/oxidant and A/F is the air-to-fuel ratio. Since
we are representing the reaction rate by an overall rate, the only way of accommo-
dating the different air-to-fuel ratios of gaseous mixtures is to treat it by an overall
function as represented above. When the temperature reaches the adiabatic tem-
perature T's, both the reactants are completely consumed and their mass fraction
is zero (even if one reactant goes to zero as may happen when the mixture is fuel or
oxidizer rich, the recation rate goes to 0). m = 1 for effectively uni-molecular and m
= 2 for bimolecular class of reactions. Thus

tey(Ty — To) = Appte EPRI (Thy — Tp) f(A) F)vH (9.3)

T; is a result of the heat balance noted above. We denote the left-hand side of
the equation by LHS and the right-hand side, by RHS. We can plot both LHS and
RHS as functions of 7 in a graph as in Fig. 9.5. The LHS plots as a straight
line and it can be taken to represent rate of heat removal with several straight
lines corresponding to different values of /n. RHS is a curve which is close to the
temperature axis at the left side and goes to zero at adiabatic temperature 7’.
RHS represents heat generation rate. The straight lines representing the heat
removal rate intersect the heatv release rate curve at points that can be identified
as the points of solution of eqn. (9.3). The points of intersection can be one, two
or three. If one takes the line DA’, the solution occursat D only. This represents
cold flow. This is the case of extinction. It occurs because the heat generation rate
is so small that this can be dissipated at near ambient temperature. The limiting
line DA has two solutions — one at D and another at A. The solution at A has
flame. If we decrease rin we get a solution at points D, B, and C. The solution at
B at an intermediate temperature can be argued to be unstable. Suppose by some
mechanism, one disturbs the system by raising the temperature beyond B. Notice
then that the heat generation rate is more than the heat carried away by gases
[rep (Ty — To). This causes further increase in temperature and it goes on till point
C is reached. If at C one raises the temperature, the heat taken away is more
than heat generated and temperature falls back to C. And if at B one disturbs the
temperature toward the lower side, then the additional heat carried away becomes
more than the heat generated and temperature falls till point D is reached. Again,
similar argument shows that A is a stable operating point. If we reduce the flow

78
