9.1 Stability of a Bunsen Flame

In the fourth example drawn from what is known as the after-burner of an air-
craft engine, one has a relatively high speed stream flowing through a straight duct.
The gases flowing through the duct come from main combustion chamber and these
are quite oxidizer rich—with almost 70-80 % of the capacity of air to oxidize (16—
18 % oxygen as compared to 23 % oxygen in air) and at temperatures ~600-700
K. Into this stream is supplied a fine spray of kerosene at various locations. The
kerosene in fact may be sprayed upstream so that the mixing is good. At short dis-
tance downstream, the mixture becomes homogeneous with fine droplets in a hot
stream. Baffles of cylindrical or other shapes are provided in the duct to help hold
the flame in these locations. For this reason these are called flame holders. Down-
stream, the flame expands around each of these holders and the entire burnt gases
mix before approaching the nozzle. Sometimes, if the speed of the stream is higher
or the pressure lower, the flame may not be capable of being held. In this case, no
combustion takes place in the chamber. The flame is then said to have been blown
off. We need to investigate what conditions cause blow-off and so help design a new
system where blow-off does not occur.

We shall revert to the first question on stability now.

Consider the Bunsen burner with the air valve open. This implies that what
flows through the tube is a premixed gas of fuel and air. At one condition of the flow
rate one obtains a conical flame. Any reduction in flow rate will reduce the height of
the conical flame. This reduction in height will continue with reduction in flow rate
to such an extent that below some flow rate the flame will simply move through the
tube downward and burn up all that is in the tube. Then the flame will extinguish.
If on the other hand the flow through the tube is continuously increased, the flame
will move beyond the edge of the burner and the difference in height is called lift
height. At one stage the flame will simply blow-off.

This implies that beyond some flow rates the flame blows off; below some flow
rates it flashes back; and in a region in between, the flame is stable.

9.1 Stability of a Bunsen Flame

The velocity profiles at the burner exit for different flow rates are shown in Fig. 9.2 (a).
As can be seen, the profile is parabolic (for laminar flow conditions—relevant here)
and is deeper as flow rate increases. The region near the rim is shown in an en-
larged manner in Fig. 9.2 (b). The flame speed is nearly constant in the middle
portion of the tube and reduces to zero near the rim because of heat loss (and
quenching). The lines A, B, C refer to velocity profiles at different flow rates. The
coordinate y is along a radial line normal to the wall and u is the stream velocity at
any y. At normal flow rates (A) the two curves (A) and (S,) intersect. At large flow
rate (B) the slope of the u vs y curve is steeper than the S, vs. y curve. At very low
flow rates (C), the slope of u vs y is smaller than S,, vs. y near the wall. It is only in

75
