9.3 Stability of a Candle Flame

chamber.

9.3 Stability of a Candle Flame

We now move on to the case (c)— candle and matchstick flames. The question here
is: How is it that increased flow of oxidizer causes the flame blow off or extinction?
And at what speed does it extinguish? The answer to this question has been dis-
cussed already. The only point of difference is that the system is not so simple as we
discussed above. As distinct from a stirred reactor model, the candle flame is a dif-
fusion flame and mixing-controlled. The match stick flame is somewhat premixed
flame controlled, and yet affected by local distribution of flow rates.

Therefore, the changes to our earlier statements can be derived from the expres-
sion related to time scales. In the candle flame, the distribution of local velocities,
mass fraction of species and temperature exist and hence the distribution of reac-
tion rates over the region. One can examine if the peak temperature in the region
will fall rapidly as a consequence of an air stream flowing around the flame. De-
tailed numerical calculations of this class for slightly simpler geometries like the
one opposed jet diffusion flame (flames stabilized between two opposite jets of fuel
and oxidizer) or premixed flame (flames stabilized between two jets of premixed
fuel-oxidizer mixture) yield plots like shown in Fig. 9.7 for various inlet stream
temperatures. In this figure, the peak temperature in the field (7,,..) is plotted
against D| l= Ten/Ty With 7; = d/V where d is interpreted as the diameter of the jet
and V is the jet speed.

Assume that the system is at D at an ambient temperature of 300 K under no
flame conditions. At this condition or between D and C, ignition causes the point to
shift to upper branch—called equilibrium branch, i.e., say from D to A. If now the
speed of the stream is increased, point A moves to B. The temperature falls slightly
(say, from 2300 to 2000 K or so). At condition B, any slight increase in speed causes
the flame to suddenly extinguish and the system takes position C. This speed is the
maximum that can be set with flame being present in the system. Beyond C (larger
velocities), the system will not ignite at all. In this region the heat convected away
from any region in the flow is much larger than the energy input rate and steady
state with no flame existing at all.

The curve joining B and D can be shown to be unstable and the branches AB
and DE are stable. Such curves are called S curves (you can see an S curve for a
plot of T},4. vs. D1 as is usually done). The curves are not special to combustion
alone. They occur in many nonlinear problems of dynamics like vibration of non-
linear spring—mass systems. When the inlet stream temperature is large, say, 1200
K, the transition process does not have any discontinuities. There is flame’ at all
Damkéhler numbers, with small, non-insignificant reactions at temperatures little
above the stream temperature and reasonable reactivity at higher temperatures.

81
