10 Diffusion Flames

jected in the form of a spray into the combustion chamber/furnace along with air; a
bright flame results after ignition.

In reciprocating engines of the compression ignition kind, high-speed diesel is
injected in the form of a fine spray into the combustion chamber at the time when
the piston has compressed the air inside to a relatively high pressure. It is the
droplet ignition and combustion process in the highly turbulent and highly varying
environment in durations of the order of a few to a few tenths of milliseconds that
keeps millions of Cl engines going.

All gas turbine engines, particularly aviation gas turbines, use ATF (aviation
turbine fuel) consisting of refined kerosene. Kerosene is injected it the form of a
fine spray into a complex fluid-mechanical environment, and the combustion takes
place in this zone.

Liquid rocket engines invariably use injectors whose primary intention is to
atomise the liquids into a fine spray; the liquid droplets vaporise in the combustion
chamber and then burn up before going through the nozzle.

In all these cases, it is of interest to determine the burn rate of a liquid droplet
as a function of its diameter, and the thermodynamic and transport properties of
the gaseous environment.

The burn rate is also affected by the flow of the oxidizer past the droplet, either
forced or induced by gravitational environment. The effect of gravitational environ-
ment is called free convection and is due to velocities induced by differing densities
in the 1g field that all of us experience. Because of this the flame will appear as in
Fig. 10.2 (b). If the drop is burnt in a free fall condition, like in the case of a freely
falling elevator, which is one of the normal experimental methods adopted for such
studies, one obtains a spherically symmetric flame as in Fig. 10.2 (a). If the drop is
burning in a situation where the fluid (the oxidizer, say) is flowing past the droplet,
the flame shape appears as in Fig. 10.2 (¢).

The drop vaporisation and combustion rate in case Fig. 10.2 (a) will be in a sense
a base burn rate. In the situation of Fig. 10.2 (b), free convection effects defined by
a Grashoff number play an important role. The drop vaporisation/ combustion rate
in case Fig. 10.2 (c¢) is dependent on the Reynolds number of the flow.

The problem of drop vaporisation at zero ¢g can be obtained by solving energy
conservation differential equation as follows.
d dT d
—4rkr?— ——c,T = 10.8
dr RT dr ar » 5 ( )
The first term represents the conduction heat transfer and the second the convec-
tion term. This differential equation states that at any radial location,r, the heat
transferred by conduction per unit volume per unit time is balanced by that from
convection. The differential equation is of the ordinary kind and of second order.
Its solution has two constants. The constants are determined by using appropriate

90
