9 Stability, Extinction and Blow-Off of Flames

FLAME

~—
—

= << ( >
FUEL a
_—

OXIDANT
RECIRCULATING ZONE

Figure 9.8: Flame holders

The behavior that is observed is similar both for premixed and diffusion flames. A
typical experiment that illustrates this is the flame obtained near the stagnation
region of the opposed jet streams with identical premixed mixtures or air and oxi-
dant components in the case of diffusion flame. If we interpret the fluid time scale
(length scale/stream speed) as representative of stretch i.e., increasing the speed
reducing the fluid stay time and hence increasing the strain rate on the flame, the
above results can be used to explain the observed flame temperatures being lower
than the adiabatic flame temperature in complex fluid flows, a subject discussed in
Chapter 4.

9.4 Bluff body flame stabilization

We shall move on to case (d). Again, the case is typical of flame stability. The time
taken for the fluid to traverse the after-burner is t; = L/V, where L is the length
of the after-burner and V is the mean speed. Typical speeds are about 150 m/s
and L ~ 1.5 m. This implies ty = 10 ms. The reaction time at the conditions of
after burner inlet (800 K) is about 10-15 ms. Since these numbers are comparable,
the reactions will not be complete. In order to complete the reaction, the flame
holders are introduced. The way flame holders work is shown in Fig. 9.8. The
oncoming flow goes around the obstacle and this causes a recirculation zone, so
much so that even if V is large, the zone behind the obstacles will have low velocities
because the fluid will be recirculating in this zone. Because the velocities are low,
the effective stay time of the fluids is enhanced significantly. Consequently, the
flame will be stabilized in the recirculation zone. Again, even in the case with flame
stabilizers, the flame would be blown off if the incoming velocity exceeds a critical
value. The blow-off velocity can be estimated by the logic enunciated earlier. Taking
the recirculation zone to be approximating a stirred reactor, we have

mey(Ty — Tp) = if vH

Here v is the volume of the recirculation zone, scaling like d3. The flow rate 7 can
be calculated as pAV, where A is the cross-sectional area of fluid entrained in the
recirculation zone, again scaling like d?>. Thus we can can obtain a relationship for

82
