10 Diffusion Flames

surface like what happens in rocket engines (hybrid) are also examples of diffusion
flames.

We shall first examine the case of laminar burner diffusion flame. When gaseous
fuel issues out of a tube into ambient atmosphere of air and the gas is ignited, a
flame, usually conical, is established (Fig. 6.1 (c)) (notice that air entry hole is to be
closed). The question being asked is—How high is the diffusion flame? While con-
servation equations can be written down under certain approximations and solved
to obtain the flame height, one can make a simple set of arguments and obtain a
relation for flame height which has all the elements in it.

Oxygen has to arrive at the flame by diffusion. The length scale for diffusion
is d/2 because the flame tip is at the centre. The time taken for diffusion is tp =
d?/4D1,, where Dy, is the diffusion coefficient (~ 2-6x107°m?/s). One can ask the
question: How did we write this expression?

In the phenomenology, one can see there are two quantities: (a) a distance d
over which diffusion should occur and (b) diffusion coefficient, Dis, unit of which
is m?/s. The only way of obtaining a time scale from these two quantities is to
take d?/D13. That is how the expression is obtained. During the period tp, the
fluid has moved a distance Vip. And this distance must equal h because the flame
ends at a point where all the fuel has got all the necessary oxidizer (स्टोइकोमेट्रिक
proportion). Thus,

Vd: ny

h ~ ~
4D12  Di2p

(10.1)

 

 

The diffusion coefficient Dis is so subscripted because we must define the two
species diffusing into each other. It is adequate for the present to take a mean
diffusion coefficient between the fuel and the oxidizer, though systematic analysis
uses what is known as the trace diffusion coefficient, which treats the fact that one
species diffuses into the gas mixture. Kinetic theory of gases allows the diffusion
coefficients to be described by

1/1 1
TL.75 mt)

p o2Qp ’

 

Diy = 2.628 x 1073

where 0 and Qp are molecular properties, and .#,, .#>, the molecular weights of
species. From the above equation the diffusion coefficient Di, is seen to vary as
p~! and 717 (the dependence of o and 2p on temperature is such that the overall
dependence on temperature is of the form Dy ~ T17). Therefore, D5p varies as
p? and T°". Thus Ds p is independent of pressure. We then have from eqn. (10.1)
that the height of the flame is independent of pressure at fixed mass flow rate of
the fuel. Alternately, as mass flow rate (or velocity) is increased, the height varies
linearly. The last fact was the one experimentally observed about thirty years ago.

86
