10.1 What will Happen to the Height in the Turbulent Range?

10.1 What will Happen to the Height in the Turbulent
Range?

A turbulent flow through ducts begins when the Reynolds number is beyond 2300
or so. A velocity of air of 1 m/s through a tube of 20 mm diameter has a Reynolds
number of about 2400. A larger diameter or higher velocity fluid passing through
the duct leads to the flow being turbulent. The mechanics of diffusion in turbulent
flows is different from that in laminar flows. In laminar flows, diffusion occurs be-
cause of random motion of molecules. In turbulent flows, large scale motion caused
by fluctuations (which themselves are triggered because of instability in the flow)
makes diffusion occur over large length scales and with larger amount of effective
diffusion. Turbulent diffusion is thus characterized by eddy diffusivity. There are
various methods of describing these in conservation equations, most of which need
improvement because of lack of clear understanding of the phenomenon of turbu-
lence.

It is adequate for an overall appreciation of the situation to treat the turbulent
diffusion time scale tp as C'd/2V where d/2 is the characteristic distance of diffusion
and V the velocity of the fluid. This expression appears more like a convective time
scale. The justification for this is that eddies of various sizes flip over and transfer
the fluid from the centre to the outer edge. Thus, effective length scale is d/2 and
the velocity of the fluid stream flipping the gases from the centre is V.

With this expression we obtain

Ccvd Cd
h = t = — = —
Vip = 55 = 3
Thus in turbulent flow, the height of the flame is independent of speed of the in-
coming fluid, but depends on the diameter of the duct. If now, we add the effects of
stoichiometry and oxidizer mass fraction, we get

h=Cd/fYose (10.7)

The constant C is related to the turbulent entrainment characteristics (or inverse
of eddy diffusion constant) (C~ 3).

10.2 Droplet Combustion

We now move on to droplet combustion. Droplet combustion is of relevance in
many industrial applications, as well as combustion in reciprocating, gas turbine
and rocket engines. For instance, all furnaces in industries use light diesel oil or
furnace oil which are less refined forms of crude petroleum. These liquids get in-

89
