10.3 Boundary Layer Combustion

The enhancement due to flow can be also as large as in free convection, But if
one causes a large flow past the droplet, extinction will occur. (This was discussed
in Chapter 9)

10.3 Boundary Layer Combustion

We shall be concerning ourselves with diffusion flames in boundary layers here.
This does not mean that premixed flame combustion cannot occur in the boundary
layers. They do occur and can be treated similarly. What are boundary layers?

Whenever fluid flows past sheets and plates, flat or curved, the fluid velocity
at the surface of the plate is zero, because non-zero fluid viscosity demands that
there can be no difference in velocity between the plate and the fluid next to it.
Consequently, the fluid velocity varies from zero at the surface to the free stream
value away from the surface. This zone over which variation in velocity takes place
is called boundary layer (Fig. 10.3 (a)).

One might wonder why there are no gradients in the free stream even though
every fluid has viscosity. In fact, it is precisely because of viscosity that there are
no differences in velocity in the free stream. Viscosity acts as a great equaliser. It
comes into action when there are differences in velocities and acts to smoothen the
differences. In the case of flow past a wall, viscosity acts as a smoothening effect
taking the stream speed from zero at the surface to its non-zero finite value in the
fress stream. The usual descriptions of boundary layer show a fluid moving past
a fixed body. One could equally well consider a moving body in a quiescent fluid.
The velocity of the fluid near the surface is close to that of the surface. It reduces
to zero away from the surface (Fig. 10.3 (b)). The region over which the variation
takes place, again, is boundary layer.

It is important to recognize that the idea of boundary layer is not restricted
to velocity alone. It can be for temperature as well as for species mass (or mole)
fractions. In fact, just as viscosity is to velocity gradients, thermal conductivity is to
temperature gradients and mass diffusivity is to species mass fraction gradients.

Flow gradients need not always be next to a wall; one could have gradients in
the flow regions also. For instance, take the case of injection of a hot fluid into a
cold flowing stream. There will be temperature difference between the two fluids
in the flow which will be smoothened by thermal conductivity in a narrow region
between the bulk of the cold and the hot fluids. This layer is called mixing layer as
it does not involve a wall. In the case of wall, the terminology of boundary layer is
used. Another example would be of the injection of one miscible fluid into another
in a flowing system. Here the mass diffusivity plays a role of smoothening the
differences in concentration between the two fluids.

Boundary layer thickness depends on the speed of the fluid, the distance from

95
