10.2 Droplet Combustion

One can notice that this value is larger than the linear estimate indicated earlier.

The treatment of the problem of droplet combustion (under zero g) is similar,
but needs more work. A flame surrounds the droplet at a distance 10 to 15 times
the drop radius from the centre and transfers heat to the droplet. In the treatment
of this problem one uses a well known (to combustion theoreticians) approximation
called the thin flame approximation. It is good to understand the features of this
approximation because most diffusion flame treatments invoke it.

In this approximation, which is based on the fact that diffusion is slower than
reaction because the fuel and the oxidant are unmixed until the flame is reached,
the reaction rates are taken infinitely fast compared to diffusion. Such an approxi-
mation makes the flame infinitesimally thin. Since the oxidizer and the fuel come
from both sides of the flame to-wards it, and reaction is very fast, it implies that the
fuel and oxidizer are completely consumed at the flame (their mass fraction is zero
at the flame) and no leakage past the flame can take place (fuel mass fraction is
zero on the oxidant side and vice versa). The temperature has a peak at this flame
location.

The flame is located by assuming that the fuel and oxidizer fluxes approaching
the flame are in स्टोइकोमेट्रिक proportions. This implies,

Dor pdYyy/dr)/(DyspdYy/dr) = Stoichiometric ratio (10.16)
f f

Using this expression and other conditions, it is possible to solve the conservation
equations in a straightforward manner. One interesting feature of these solution
techniques is that one solves the एंथलपी and element conservation relations first
as these are unaffected by thin flame approximation Subsequently, one obtains the
complete solution after imposing the approximation. The solutions give

te = ry) Ke. (10.17)
where —_
K, =F n+ Be) (10.18)
‘p Pl

It can be noted that the expression for the time of combustion (and for the mass

burn rate) is similar to that of vaporisation and the only difference is in the value

of transfer number B,.

_ HYyo0/5 4 ¢p(Ts — Tp)
L

It can be noted that the temperature difference term in vaporization is (7p — 75)
whereas for combustion it is (7; — Tp). It is so arranged because vaporization oc-
curs only when the ambient temperature Tj is larger than the surface temperature
Ts, and for combustion, the surface temperature is usually larger than the ambient
temperature. However, it is possible for combustion to occur with the surface tem-
perature lower than the ambient temperature because the heat released from the

Be. (10.19)

93
