10.3 Boundary Layer Combustion

flame has oxidizer and products. Fuel and oxidizer do not coexist under conditions
of thin flame. This approximation is quite good in reality in so far as the estimation
of various properties are concerned.

One could have problems of combustion in free convective conditions—something
which happens in fire problems. This problem of combustion in free convective
boundary layer is not different from what happens in forced convection (as shown
in Fig. 10.4).

The question in such a situation is this: how will the mass burn rate of the fuel
block depend on the mass flow rate of the oxidizer (forced convection), oxidizer mass
fraction in free stream, pressure, and thermodynamic and transport properties of
the fuel and the oxidizer. It follows that one needs to have information on the veloc-
ity, temperature and mass fraction profiles in order to obtain the result. However,
one has some shortcuts from a knowledge of similarity of these profiles and related
features.

In order to solve boundary layer combustion problems, a simple way of starting
the solution is to strike a heat balance at the surface of the burning fuel. It appears
similar to the one written earlier and reads like

dy = kg [0T/0y],—o = ppr'L (10.25)

In eqn. (10.25), k, is the gas phase thermal conductivity and dy is the heat flux
to the surface, the expression given by the product of conductivity of the gas and
partial derivative of temperature with distance normal to the local surface. The
right-hand side is the product of the density of the solid/liquid fuel, » the linear
regression rate and L is the heat of phase change at the surface. The product p,r is
the mass flux from the fuel surface.

pprL = (10.26)

The expression for heat flux ¢; from gas phase depends on the nature of the flow
(free or forced convection) and boundary conditions (free stream temperature, for
instance). Curiously, it also depends on p,7. This effect is called the blocking effect
It comes about in the following manner. If the heat flux from gas phase increases,
then one expects the mass flux from surface (mass burn rate per unit area) to in-
crease. This causes the boundary layer to thicken and causes reduction in gradi-
ents. Thus any effort to raise the burn rate by increasing heat flux, will not happen
in a linear manner as seen from eqn.( 10.26) but will be lower. This modification is
to be estimated from a rigorous analysis specific to the flow geometry.

We shall follow a general scheme for solving a variety of combustion problems.
The heat flux to the surface is taken as a product of heat transfer coefficient and

97
