10.4 Overview

For turbulent free convective flows it varies as

pp = CoB™ (ky/ cpg) (GrPr)t/3 (10.36)

The constant Cy may take different values in each of the above cases. The de-
pendence on Reynolds number and Grashoff number shown above are observed in
several complex situations where flows are laminar or turbulent. The value of the
exponent m on B was thought to be about 0.25 till the nineties. This small value for
the exponent coupled with the variation of B by a factor of 1.5 over the fuels gave
rise to the conclusion that the regression rate is about the same no matter what
fuel you choose. Experiments showed otherwise — differences in regression rate be-
tween different fuels were much higher. This was explained in the nineties when
the blocking effect was examined more carefully. It was uncovered that the blocking
effect depended on the density profile through the boundary layer. For instance, in-
jecting carbon dioxide (molecular weight of 44) or gaseous species with even higher
molecular weight differed from the results of experiments with air. In boundary
layer combustion, most fuels have much higher molecular weight, more particu-
larly polymeric fuels whose fragments in the gas phase have a molecular weight of
several hundred. Consequently, a theory that was developed accounting for these
effects showed a complex expression that could be approximated to m = 0.5 in most
cases. This explained the observed dependence of regression rate on fuels.

The above relations explain an interesting fact which one experiences in every-
day life. Take firewood logs burning in stoves. The varieties of fire-wood available
differ in density (p, over a wide range 300 to 1000 kg/m?). It is observed that lighter
woods burn faster. This is consistent with the equation above, which expresses the
mass flux of fuel (density times linear burn rate) in terms of flow, thermodynamic
and transport properties. And other parameters remaining same (as they usually
do for similar sized logs), lighter fuels must burn proportionately faster. This also
explains the observed ‘long’ combustion times for coal. Coal has a high density—
1300 kg/m? and has much lower volatile content (~ 30 %). Hence, if one used a
wood burning stove to operate on coal, one would find that coal would burn for
nearly twice as long or more after the coal started burning—the effects of higher
density and larger fraction of char in coal.

Typical regression rates vary from 0.02-0.4 mm/s for most solid/ liquid fuels
with air, the precise value depending on the fuel, flow rates and size. These re-
gression rates are very small and are essentially due to the diffusion nature of the
flame.

10.4 Overview

Diffusion flames have been described as the largest class of flames encountered in
nature. These flames usually appear yellow in colour. They are also tall because

101
