11 Flames—Premixed or Diffusion

Most natural flames are diffusion flames while most arranged combustion devices
are premixed. This describes one essential difference between the two. One is nat-
urally provoked to ask: Why should arranged devices be premixed? One answer
is that premixing leads to lesser pollutants and combustion can be expected to be
completed better in much smaller volumes. This is indeed true. Premixing of fuel
and oxidizer, in gaseous/condensed phase, would help the cause of combustion bet-
ter since the elements do not have to look for each other. They are available in the
immediate vicinity.

11.1 Premixed substances

It has been said that gaseous/ condensed phases can be premixed. Yes, one under-
stands gaseous media being premixed. It happens all the time in a gas stove where
fuel gas entrains air before coming out of the hundred odd holes of the burner to
burn up. Or in the kerosene stove where, by an ingenious method, the kerosene
vapour and air are mixed in the annular space between the perforated sheets be-
fore combustion takes place.

But does premixing occur in liquids? Well, if one uses chemicals which have both
fuel and oxidizer elements in a single molecule, then one could treat the substance
as having premixedness. Hydrogen peroxide is a case in point. It has both the
elements in a single molecule (H202) and it is of course very reactive by itself (it is
also very corrosive). There are other liquid solutions which have both oxidizer and
fuel elements almost of right proportions. These are explosive in nature and wait
for the smallest opportunity to be triggered into exothermic reactions and gasify
so fast that usually explosions result. One example is nitroglycerine (liquid), used
extensively in solid propellant industry.

In solids too there are several cases where molecules have both oxidizer and fuel
elements. Ammonium perchlorate (NV H4Cl1Oy) is oxidizer rich but has both elements
in it. It burns up by itself at relatively high pressures (on ignition). HMX is another
example.

All solid propellants are instances of premixing of fuel and oxidizer. When they

103
