11.2 Diffusion Flames

which are not known very accurately. As such, accurate predictions of features like
ignition, flammability limits in premixed flows are dependent on some experimen-
tal features more than in diffusion flames.

Though the simple results presented in the case of droplet combustion or lami-
nar/ turbulent boundary layer combustion and free convective combustion contain
such factors like (k/c,), which vary with temperature and composition, it is possi-
ble to construct analysis and make predictions which are quite accurate and rep-
resentative of what is experimentally observed. In fact, such analyses have been
completed in recent times in most of such instances.

An interesting feature of diffusion flames is their wide range of stability. If a
burner is to be built and one seeks a diffusion/ premixed solution to the device, the
aspect of stability plays a critical role which might prevent the choice of a premixed
alternative. In diffusion flames, the flame locates itself at स्टोइकोमेट्रिक flux ratio
location and hence poses less restriction on its existence in the burner. In the case
of premixed flame, one must locate regions where the speed of the flow is nearly
equal to the flame speed. If the flow conditions are changed then the flame is likely
to blow off.

This problem does not look so serious if one considers a gas stove. In a gas stove
additional ‘flame holding’ effect is provided by the body through which premixed
gas issues out. This enhances the stability of the stove flame. The flow rates are
about 0.1 to 0.2 g/s, and the flow velocities through the holes are about 0.1 m/s.
If one were to conceive a similar design for an industrial application with power of
the order of several hundred kilowatts to a few megawatts, the size of the burner
becomes too large. For instance, if one wishes to scale up the cook stove designed for
2 kW power to 100 kW power, one needs the top burner diameter of 0.35 m in the
place of 0.05 m. But then in 0.35 m dia space one can push about 4 MW of thermal
power, excepting that in such a case combustion is largely in the diffusive mode.

In free flames (non-material bounded), premixed flames are indeed very unsta-
ble and diffusion flames provide much greater stability.

Thus, clean combustion (producing minimum pollutants) demands premixed
flame and greater stability calls for diffusion flame.

105
