11 Flames—Premixed or Diffusion

burn at not too high a pressure, they act as though they are premixed. Premixed
flames are affected by pressure and initial temperature significantly. This is be-
cause chemistry plays a strong role in their combustion scheme. The final temper-
ature they attain on combustion depends on the mixture ratio. The flame speed
depends on the mixture ratio, the pressure and the initial temperature. They can
be quenched and are flammable over a relatively narrow range of mixture ratios.

Because pressure and initial temperature play an more important role in pre-
mixed flames, combustion of solid propellants depends strongly on these factors.
The burning rate of a solid propellant varies with pressure as p"'2, with my varying
from 0.3 to 0.8 and with initial temperature as 0.2—1% per °C.

11.2 Diffusion Flames

Diffusion flames are generally more pollutant-generating for the fuel does not get
enough oxidant in the right place. Not all flames soot alike though. Candle flame
for instance, does not soot most of the time. Surely, if you introduce a relatively
cold surface into the flame, you can collect some soot. But most soot burns off inside
the flame. In a kerosene wick flame (meant for lighting), slightly larger in size and
hence with taller flames, one finds heavy sooting. Yet in a kerosene stove one gets a
blue flame. This is because the oxidant gets mixed with the fuel vapour in the right
place, i.e., before any possible decomposition of the fuel taking place.

It is quite generally thought that peak temperatures in a diffusion flame must
be lower because the combustion is not complete. One can measure the peak tem-
perature of a candle flame by using a fine (thin) thermocouple and find it is 1600
°C (1873 K) just about 100 °C lower than its adiabatic temperature. In fact, in
the thin flame approximation which is close to reality, the temperature of the flame
is related to adiabatic flame temperature but a little short of it depending on the
fluid mechanics of the flow. In the case of droplet combustion, the temperature is
the same as adiabatic flame temperature. In others like stagnation point diffusion
flame (same as opposed jet diffusion flame discussed in Chapter 9, section 9.3), it is
lower.

In the case of diffusion flame, there is no well-recognized quantity like flame
speed to define the reactivity of fuel-oxidane mixtures. A quantity called appar-
ent flame strength, the mass flux of oxidizer or fuel in an opposed jet/stagnation
point flow at the condition of extinction is defined. This quantity again defines the
reactivity of the fuel-oxidizer system.

One of the most important aspects of diffusion flames is the dominance of fluid
mechanics over kinetics with the result that the calculation of burn rates in diffu-
sion flames is a lot less uncertain. This is because kinetic dominated phenomena
depend on the parameters Ay, the frequency factor and F, the activation energy

104
