12.1 How Do We Understand the Effects of Burn Rate Modifiers?

12.1 How Do We Understand the Effects of Burn Rate
Modifiers?

Catalysts as understood in elementary chemistry are substances which alter the
rate of reaction without actually getting consumed. But in combustion processes,
the catalysts get consumed, yet serving the purpose of altering the rates of reaction.
Hence, it is more appropriate to call these catalyst-like substances as burn rate
modifiers.

Burn rate modifiers affect both the gas phase and condensed phase reaction
paths and also cause physical changes near the burning surface. There are many
inorganic compounds that produce certain products which melt and spread over the
surface and reduce heat transfer to the surface. Some will enhance the rate of reac-
tion in the gas phase near the surface so that the flame is drawn nearer to the sur-
face causing added heat transfer. In a few cases, it may be a combination of events
which leads to changes in burn rate vs pressure behaviour. A remarkable feature of
these burn rate modifiers is that even small amounts, typically 0.5% or less, affect
the burn rates by more than 10-50%. These features are difficult to model and as
yet not much progress has been made in understanding these dramatic effects.

The pressure in the chamber of a rocket engine is due to the balance between
mass production rate and mass flow rate through the nozzle. While the former
has already been described, the latter can be calculated from fundamentals of gas
dynamics to be

Mnozzle = (PeAt)/c", c= (RTy/ A )/T (7) (12.7)
where c* is the characteristic velocity, a function of flame temperature 7’, molecular
weights of products of combustion and a function I'(y) (0.6-0.64) which depends on

ratio of specific heats, v (~1.1-1.25). Equating the mass production rate and mass
outflow rate through nozzle we get:

Mproduction = Pp Apr = Mnpozzle = peAt/c* (12.8)

with 7 = a1p}?, a1 = aexp(To — 17). Here Tj is the reference ambient temperature.
From this equation, we get

4 Yan)
Pe = ipa (12.9)

This is a very revealing result. If you take a double-base propellant with n = 0.8,
then
pe ~ (Ap/Ar)>° (12.10)

If the mechanical integrity of the propellant (it implies the ability of the solid pro-
pellant as a structural entity to withstand the pressures and loads) is not sat-
isfactory or the preparation of the propellant with the rocket motor is such that

111
