equations are solved completely to obtain

k _
pp = i In(1 + B) (12.5)

The average of the reaction rate is taken from the surface to infinity where the

conditions are adiabatic. The behaviour of wy can be written as

wy ~ Apple B/2RTs

and

k
ppl =~ Ar In(1+ B) p"/? e EIR; (12.6)

This shows that the burn rate increases with pressure like p*/2. For bimolecular

collisions n ~ 2. But for overall reactions it varies as n ~ 1.6-2. Thus,
poi = p(08-1.0)

a result consistent with the experimental observations on double-base propellants.
That the burn rate increases with pressure can be understood in one of the two
equivalent ways. Increase in pressure brings the flame thickness down and, hence,
enhances the heat transfer to the surface of the burning propellant, thus increasing
the burning rate. Alternatively, increase in pressure implies increase in average
density of molecules which need smaller physical distance for reactive collisions and
hence flame is brought closer to the surface and results in increased heat transfer
rate and increased burn rate.

In the case of heterogeneous propellants like ammonium perchlorate (AP) based
composite propellants, the solid particles of Ammonium are embedded in a matrix
of binder and when the burning takes place, the flame structure is as shown in
Fig. 12.2. There will be a diffusion flame between the oxidizer and binder at the
interface. Above the oxidizer particle, there will be a premixed flame due to the
fact that AP can self-deflagrate (monopropellant) at high pressures (above 19 atm).
The diffusion flame has a typical temperature of ~ 2800 K and the premixed flame
above the AP particle about 1400-1500 K. The products of these flames are locally
either fuel-rich or oxidizer-rich. They mix above the surface and burn up gener-
ating temperatures of 2800-3200 K depending on the propellant composition and
pressure. An approximate but complex mathematical model for the burning of the
propellant and the burn rate as a function of pressure, particle size and other com-
positional variables has been worked out. This shows that as pressure increases,
the diffusion flame effects dominate simply because the flame heights become com-
parable to the particle size of the oxidizer. And in a diffusion flame, the burn rate
depends little on pressure. Thus the combined effects of premixed flame dominance

109
