12 Combustion in Rocket Motors

Noting that thrust varies as burning area and burn rate, we can examine the lin-
ear burn rate » as a function of pressure and initial temperature. It is typically
represented as

7 = ap expla(Ty — 17)

where a, n and a are constants, 7; indicates a reference temperature. For double
base propellants n ~ 0.6-0.8 and a = 0.5—-2 mm/s and a= 0.4-0.6 %/°C. For compos-
ite propellants n ~ 0.2-0.4 and a = 1-2 mm/s and a = 0.2-0.4 %/°C. The chamber
pressure, p., is indicated in units of sea level pressure. For example, p. = 10 atm
implies 10 times sea level pressure of (0.1013 M Pa). These are just facts derived
from experiments.

These experimental data need explanation — Why is it that burn rate increases
with pressure much more for double-base than for composite propellants? Why is
there a dependence on initial temperature? And so on.

Propellant combustion has essentially a premixed flame structure for double-
base propellants and also for composite propellants at relatively low pressures. The
last fact is so because at low pressures flame thickness is large compared to the
characteristic size of the heterogeneity of the composite propellant (particle size of
the oxidizer, say, AP). The way to understand propellant combustion is to recall
one-dimensional laminar flame propagation treated earlier. Figure 10.1 showed
the many features of propellant combustion. The flame is about y* away from the
surface of the propellant. The burn rate can be determined from eqn. 10.26 which
is rewritten:

i! = pyiL (12.1)

The heat flux from the flame, gj, is composed of contributions from conduction and
radiation. The radiation component is about 10-20% of that due to conduction in
many situations; in a few cases it is as high as 30%. The conductive flux can be set
out using y*, the height of flame, which is related to chemical reaction rates as in
laminar flame theory as

dar (Ty —T,
=k IT) (12.2)
g dy y*
, kl
pf

In the above equation wf! is the average reaction rate. Using the expression for

reaction rate gives

k
ppit = B li (12.4)

The dependence of 7 on B, the transfer number as above is not correct because it
lacks the blocking effect (see chapter 10, section 3 on boundary layer combustion for
a discussion on this). The blocking effect can be determined after the conservation

108
