12.2 Liquid Rocket Engines

One notices from Fig. 12.4 that the ratio A./A; is lower as one moves from case
(a) to case (c). It is known from gas dynamics that as long as the chamber pressure
is larger than about twice the ambient pressure, the velocity at the throat is equal
to the speed of sound at the local temperature (which is about 900-1000 m/s cor-
responding to throat temperature of 2700-3000 K). The speeds of fluid flow in the
combustion chamber will be larger as we move from case (a) to case (c) since the
combustion chamber cross section becomes comparable to throat area. The higher
speeds cause larger heat transfer to the walls and also increase the possibility of
combustion instability.

‘Combustion instability’ refers to high frequency oscillations of the chamber
pressure around the steady pressure resulting in extraordinary heat transfer to
specific locations of the chamber a burn-through occurs almost always. This is a
result of the coupling between the fluid flow and acoustic oscillations. The acoustic
oscillations, which are always present in any chamber, interact with the fluid flow
and the heat generation mechanisms. The acoustic oscillations are accompanied by
those of the heat generation as well. If these oscillations are in phase, then one gets
amplification of the wave and quite often a detonation wave results. The travelling
detonation wave causes a large rise in local heat flux to the engine walls and hence
the burn-through.

The frequency of oscillations (w) can be obtained from an analysis of the acous-
tics in a given geometry. This leads to w = const (a/d.) where a is the local acoustic
speed and d. is the chamber diameter. The ratio a/d. is the inverse of acoustic
travel time and hence represents the acoustic frequency. At d. = 0.2 m (for 30-50
kN thrust engines), w = 3.0 kHz and for d. = 0.5 m (for 500-700 kN thrust engines),
w= 1.2 kHz (constant~ 0.6, a = 1000 m/s).

Since acoustic energy varies as (frequency)?, it is more difficult to excite high
frequencies since the energy required is large. Thus smaller thrust engines (us-
ing smaller combustion chamber diameter) are less prone to instability than higher
thrust engines. In fact, engines of 500-700 kN thrust almost always are beset with
the deadly high frequency instability problem. One of the best known examples of
this kind, namely, high frequency instability affecting the performance of the en-
gine, in recent times, is the ARIANE launch vehicle programme of European Space
Agency. The first stage uses engines called VIKING built by French agency pro-
duced 700 kN vacuum thrust and had frequent occurrence of instability during its
development. Though the team of designers was aware of the problems of instabil-
ity when it first struck terror during the development of ATLAS engine in USA in
the sixties, the implementation on Viking engine was made in the flight programme
without specifically overcoming the problem in a clean manner. Alas! the second
flight of the vehicle was struck by instability in one of the engines and the vehi-
cle ended up in sea a short while after take-off. Hectic research and development
efforts to overcome it have made it somewhat safe though not completely so.

113
