13 Stoves, Burners, Combustors and Their
Efficiency

Stoves are a part of domestic scene anywhere in the world. Burners are used in
industries as well. Those used to produce heat in furnaces to melt metals, to conduct
special purpose heating operations on large scale—like preheating before welding
in an industry—belong to this category. Combustors are indeed the same as burners
in the technical sense. In the generally understood sense, combustors are those
compact devices used to generate hot gases from fuels and oxidizer to perform some
task—say, run a gas turbine to generate electrical power, to propel an aeroplane, to
run pumps in a liquid rocket engine and so on.

All these combustion devices are designed considering the following issues.

High combustion efficiency as well as utilization efficiency These two are two dif-
ferent aspects. In the first, one examines how much of chemical energy that
can be converted to thermal energy (or heat) has been actually converted. In
the second, one examines how much of the heat released is utilized by the de-
vice into which the heat is being transferred. While the first is a function of
combustion detail, the second is a part of heat transfer scheme. In some cases
only the first part is important like in gas turbine combustion, Subsequently,
the hot gas goes to a turbine and the phenomenology is different— it is the flow
through a rotating machinery that does the work.

Stability and Turn Down Ratio The operation of the combusting device must be sta-
ble over the operating range. The operating range is described by what is
classically known as turn-down ratio. It is the ratio of the peak-to-lowest
acceptable power. The lower limit of the power level is decided by stability,
pollution level, and efficiency depending on the device.

Compactness The device for combusting the fuel must be as compact as can be
accomplished. In some cases like aircraft gas turbines, the increase in com-
pactness by a factor of two (volume of combustion has been reduced by a factor
of two) has made possible tremendous advances in aircraft operational perfor-
mance and thereby a reduction in the escalation of operating costs of fleets of
aircraft. In other areas like domestic stoves or industrial burners, one would
like compactness but not at high premium in relation to other factors like cost.

119
