13.1 The Devices

earlier. It might be possible for one to configure other methods of burning
kerosene. But none that the author has seen or able to concieve is as good as
the original design. The performance of the stove without and with perforated
cylindrical sheets makes immense difference to combustion. Without any one
of them, the flames surround each wick and will be yellowish, sooty and tall.
A few moments after both the sheets are placed, (and wicks ignited, of course),
the flame turns bluish, and flame height reduces significantly. The perforated
sheet quenches the diffusion flame because air is getting inducted through the
perforations and heat is taken away from the base region by the surrounding
metal parts. Hence, the vapours mix with air and the flame gets converted
to a premixed flame. The precise mechanics of such a transformation has not
been satisfactorily worked out yet.

Wood Stove Wood stoves belong to a class of devices used extensively but not un-
derstood much. Most developments that one sees around the world have been
without adequate scientific input.

A typical wood stove is shown in Fig. 13.2 It has been observed that the effi-
ciency obtainable with such stoves having three supports for keeping the ves-
sel for cooking/heating water is about 10 %. It is true that the efficiency of a
stove operating in an open area does not exceed this range. But it is incorrect
to assume that efficiencies of single pan stoves is limited to 10 %. The sim-
plest of the types shown in Fig. 13.2 can give efficiencies of about 12 % even
though sooting is a significant problem. Slight tuning of the heights of vessel
vis-a-vis grate reduces soot as well. Efficiencies up to 25 % can be obtained by
providing a grate and a confined metal surrounding to the combustion zone.
To obtain efficiencies better than this and lower emissions, one needs greater
care in the design of the elements. Smoke and soot are serious problems with
such stoves. One such design is shown in Fig. 13.3, in which A-B is the com-
bustion chamber with grate at A. Hot gases are taken through a passage that
allows good mixing between the fuel vapors and air. This makes the efficiency
go up to 50 % with relatively large diameter vessels and virtually eliminates
smoking and sooting tendencies significantly. Now that we have mentioned
smoke and soot, it appears important to discuss what they are, how they are
generated and what can be done to eliminate them.

Smoke consists of a number of gaseous species that are intermediate products
of combustion and some volatiles from wood. Smoke is a problem in the case
of kerosene combustion devices as well. It gets generated if gaseous fuel ele-
ments mixed with air are such that the mixture is beyond flammability limits
at the local temperature of the gases. This is why one finds smoke issuing from
a weakly burning wood stove having some pieces of wood which have suddenly
quenched or not ignited. This implies the operating power of the stove is low
compared to its nominal capacity. Since open stoves (stoves which do not have
chimney and have fuel entry area wide open) generally smoke considerably

121
