12 Combustion in Rocket Motors

Because the fuel vapours and gaseous oxidizer (obtained from the vaporisation of
liquid droplets) mix and burn near the boundary, it takes a long distance for the
entire oxidizer to be properly consumed. If lengths are smaller, and they usually
are, one gets a mixture of gases with oxidizer-rich and fue-rich pockets passing
through. To enable good mixing between these two, circular protuberances called
diaphragms are provided. These produce recirculation zone downstream and up-
stream of their location and result in better mixing. In moderately-sized engines,
one needs as much as three diaphragms to achieve complete mixing necessary to
obtain good combustion efficiency.

12.4 Overview

This chapter has discussed the details of how propellants burn, at what rates,
and what factors affect them. Solid propellant combustion is more chemistry-
dominated. Double-base propellants show substantial effects of chemistry. Com-
posite propellants are affected by diffusional flame structure as well. As regards
heat released or the flame temperatures, the influence of additives is essentially
linear, i.e., a small amount of additive causes a small change while a large amount,
larger change. This is because thermodynamic (or more truly thermostatic) effects
are different from chemical kinetics or rate effects. In chemical kinetics the rate
processes can be altered significantly by relatively small amounts of additive that
influence the burn rate by altering the rate of only the key s in a large number of
elementary reactions occurring in the system.

Controlling the propellant burn rate is thus an unenviable task. The classical
understanding that solid propellant rocket is simple is not true. Solid propellant
rocket looks simple; but propellant making is a very complex task and has to be
carried out very carefully.

Liquid propellant rockets in comparison look complex indeed. But a large part
of it is mechanical-engineering based and is generally better understood. The com-
bustion processes in the liquid rockets are diffusion dominated and though there
are a few unresolved questions, they are also better understood. Atomisation holds
the key to better combustion. But better combustion leads to the problem of insta-
bility in large-sized rockets. Avoiding instability calls for using damping devices
like baffles and acoustic cavities.

Most high-thrust liquid engines use fine atomisation in the injection process for
achieving high combustion efficiency and baffles and other stabilization devices for
avoiding instability.

The combustion mechanism of hybrid rocket engines is embedded in boundary
layer combustion and because of this, mixing is a serious problem and in order to
facilitate efficient of the fuel vapors and the oxidizer, devices like diaphragms are

116
