12 Combustion in Rocket Motors

some portions not expected to burn initially are exposed (even tiny spacings of 0.1—
0.2 mm are sufficient for gases to penetrate and cause combustion in unexpected
places), then the burning area, A; increases beyond what the system is designed
for. Even a 20 % rise in burning area implies that the pressure goes up by 248 %,
i.e. if the rocket motor had been designed for 2.0 M Pa (20 atmospheres), the local
pressure goes up to 5.6 MPa (56 atmospheres). Surely, the motor designed for 20
atmospheres (qualified for 40 atmospheres as per the standard design code) cannot
withstand higher pressures and the motor explodes consequently.

The problem is much less serious in the case of composite propellants which
have n between 0.2 and 0.4.

12.2 Liquid Rocket Engines

Combustion in bipropellant liquid rocket engines has a character which is vastly
different from solid rocket engines. The injectors atomise the liquid fuel and the
oxidizer into tiny drops and these undergo vaporisation first and combustion next.
The gases can recirculate in-side the combustion chamber and therefore, the tem-
perature of the gases in large part of the chamber, particularly toward the nozzle
end, will be near adiabatic flame temperature. The time taken for completion of
the combustion process as the atomised propellants move through the chamber is
composed of that for vaporisation and for chemical reaction. Since the gas tempera-
tures in the chamber are high, the time for chemical reaction will be quite small. It
is only the vaporisation which takes substantial time (~ 2-3 ms). Hence chambers
are designed based on estimated vaporisation times. The vaporisation time is de-
pendent on the drop diameter and relatively weakly on thermodynamic properties
(B). The combustion chamber volume, therefore is not strongly dependent on pres-
sure. The volume of the chamber is estimated from a quantity called L* = v./A;
where v, is the volume of the combustion chamber (up to the throat) and A; is the
throat area. Its typical value is 0.8-1.2 m or so. From this statement it looks as
though L* is a fundamental constant. This is not true. At the fundamental level,
L* should be non-dimensionalized with respect to characteristic length for vapor-
isation/reaction to be complete. This is essentially equal to Ut,,, where U is the
mean speed of liquid droplets, t¢,, is the time for vaporisation and reaction. Thus
the appropriate parameter is L* /Ut,, or

tor
L*/ / Vt
0

But it turns out that Ut,, is a value not easily calculable because of the complexity
in droplet size distribution and the nature of flow, and hence one works with a value
of L* directly in practice.

112
