13 Stoves, Burners, Combustors and Their Efficiency

122

 

Figure 13.2: The classical wood stove — vessel on three stones

when slightly wet wood is used or when the used dry-wood is not tended prop-
erly, it is often misconstrued that chimney-less stoves always smoke. This
again is untrue. If the region around combustion zone is confined and is kept
reasonably hot (~ 400 °C, say) with the amount of air entering the combustion
zone restricted to a value a little above that dictated by stoichiometry (which
is about 6.5 with dry wood), the smoking tendencies reduce substantially. In
fact, it is possible to run such wood stoves, with some attention, with no smoke
at all.

Sooting is a phenomenon in which, due to lack of sufficient oxidant at the
right place, the fuel breaks down to smaller fragments till fine carbon atoms
agglomerate along with hydrogen and form clusters to produce soot. A lot of
research has been done on the origin of soot in combustion of hydrocarbon
or biomass. Soot is formed largely in diffusion flames or fuel-rich premixed
flames. It is a kinetic process starting with ions like C,H}, reacting sequen-
tially with acetylene and other hydrocarbon compounds much like polymer-
ization reactions; one of the asymptotic soot compositions is CsH. The soot
crystallites form spherical nodules of 0.01 to 0.05 yum. The soot is generally
undesirable in cooking stoves, in diesel engines and in similar situations. But
its presence is beneficial in furnaces, because the presence of soot enhances
the emissivity of the flame and hence the transfer of heat by radiation.

In a stove, sooting occurs when the combustion rate is high. Combustion rate
is measured in terms of fuel burnt per unit time. Another way of specifying
combustion rate is power. The mass consumption rate multiplied by the heat
of combustion gives power. Typically consumptions of 1 kg/h of kerosene im-
plies 12 kWth — 12 kilowatts of thermal power and 1 kg/h of sun dry wood
implies 4.5 kWth. If a stove is designed for a nominal power (of 2 kWth),
sooting may become significant at a power level 10-15 % above its nominal
