13.2 Burners

Since the throughput of the biomass and the gases is in a narrow range, the
air-to-fuel ratio can be controlled to be in a narrow range to ensure uniform
performance. It is possible to obtain high combustion efficiencies through this
control. Keeping the excess air at no more than 10 %, high flame tempera-
tures of around 1500 K can be obtained over most of the time and high heat
transfer efficiencies as well. Practically realized efficiencies are between 40 to
55 %, depending on the vessel shape and size and the use of dry high density
biomass (pellets).

Biomass stoves used world over allow the combustion process to occur in free
convective mode. The performance of the stove in terms of sooting and to a
lesser extent, smoking would be compromised because it would be very diffi-
cult to assure a fixed air-to-fuel ratio. Small wind currents can create signif-
icant deviations in the stoichiometry and lead to sooting or smoking. If a fan
is used to drive a fixed amount of air, then the deviations of stoichiometry due
to ambient air currents can be reduced substantially for ensuring excellent
thermal and emission performance.

13.2 Burners

Burners are devices used for burning gaseous, liquid or solid fuels in furnaces or
combustion chambers. While conventional stoves usually depend on natural draft
for the intake of air, the more modern designs of stoves and burners have a forced
draft using fans and blowers. All such combustion devicesoperate on the principles
: (i) swirling air or fuel gas to help cause stable combustion in a short distance from
the burner, (ii) a swirling spray to atomise the liquid fuel to very fine droplets. This
is done by raising the pressure of the liquid to as high as 70-100 atm and making
it issue through a specific device, (iii) creating a recirculation zone to complete the
reaction in a smaller volume and stabilizing the combustion process. Figure 13.4
shows the typical details of swirl combustion process.

In the case of swirl burner, air is introduced in the tangential direction so that
the flow has a very large tangential component. This causes the flow to stay close
to the outer wall because of the centrifugal force component. Fluid particles take a
helical path so that for the same axial distance the total distance covered is much
larger depending on the extent of tangential component. Gaseous fuel may be in-
jected into the chamber through a number of holes. If the fuel is in a liquid form,
it will need atomising well. This is done by one of the several means available. A
method called pressure atomisation introduces the liquid in a tangential direction
at a certain radius. The design seen in Fig. 13.4 (c) uses a helical screw-cut rod-
in-a-tube configuration. The tube is reduced to a tiny orifice at the exit through a
smooth conical shape. The tangential velocity of the liquid increases and when it
comes cut of the orifice, and a thin conical sheet emerges. This causes early atom-

127
