13.3 Combustion Chambers

different. Why then does the gas turbine combustor need a casing with holes? The
story has to begin backwards. Every gas turbine has a compressor rotated and pow-
ered by a turbine. Between the compressor and turbine is the combustion chamber.
The hot gases from the combustion chamber are expanded through blades in the
turbine running at speeds of 9000-30,000 rpm depending on the size of the engine
(larger engines running at lower speeds). The turbine blades face a very hostile
environment — high temperature and high speed of the gases flowing past them. To
add to these problems, the conditions imposed are periodic, because of a large num-
ber of steady runs and shutdown. In order to help preserve the structural integrity
of the turbine blades, the temperature of the gases impinging on the blades of tur-
bine is limited to about 1000-1600 K. It is to be noted that स्टोइकोमेट्रिक flame
temperature is 2300 K; consequently, the combustion process has to be conducted
under fuel lean conditions, typically 1:50 or 1:100 (stoichiometry is 1:15).

The fuel-lean conditions in many cases may be outside the inflammability limit.
One may also note slight amelioration because the air coming into the chamber is at
higher temperatures (~ 600 K) and this widens the inflammability limit. How can
combustion be made stable at such lean fuel-air ratios? The combustion chamber
is so designed that for the given fuel flow, the air flow is split into several fractions
and introduced through holes meant for the purpose. The first fraction is controlled
at a fuel-air ratio near stoichiometry to ensure good combustion conditions. The
remaining portion of the air is introduced later to dilute the gas to bring it to the
designed exit temperature. The positions of holes and the size of the chamber are
decided by semi-empirical correlations based on stirred reactor studies which give
the maximum heat release rates (per unit volume) for any fuel-air ratio. These are
the upper limits beyond which reactions cannot proceed and the flame will extin-
guish.

For LPG-air combination, the maximum heat release rate is about 10* MW /m?3.
For LPG—oxygen, it is 4.5x10° MW/m3. Typical heat release rate in a domestic
kerosene stove is about 4.0 M W/m? while in a rocket engine it is about 10° MW /m?.

These can be used in the preliminary design of the combustion chamber of gas
turbine or similar engines to size the combustor.

The efficiency of combustion chamber of gas turbine engines is close to 99% at
take off or nominal operating conditions. It decreases at high loadings, implying
higher flow rates, lower pressures and relatively smaller volumes of the chamber
(put together by m/p?v in Chapter 9). The efficiency goes down to as low as 65%
at high loadings close to blow off. Figure 13.6 shows the combustion chamber of a
reciprocating diesel engine. The fuel is sprayed into the combustion chamber even
as the piston is moving upward and compressing the air. This occurs at about 20-25
° of crank angle before the top dead centre.

The liquid diesel is injected at pressures upward of 50-70 M Pa through ex-

129
