13.1 The Devices

fication rate like wise (+ / -). One needs air beyond this region to burn up the
fuel gases. Since the gasification process is self-regulating, the power can be
controlled by controlling the flow rate through the bed, this air being typically
called the primary air. The gaseous combustion process that occurs above the
bed is facilitated by the supply of air, called the secondary air. At power levels
of 2 to 3 kWith meant for domestic applications, the primary and secondary
air can be supplied using a single fan of the type used in computer industry;
there is very little pressure drop to be negotiated through the bed. Use of such
fans helps reducing the cost of the stove. The design shown in Fig. 13.3 is a
fire and forget type. Once loaded, it will burn though till all the fuel is used
up. Reuse implies cooling down the stove and reloading the combustion space
with pieces of biomass or pellets.

Another form of stove, called ejector induced gasifier stove is meant for long
stocks of wood, usually called firewood. Figure 13.4 shows such a stove schemat-
ically. Air from a fan is blown into the combustion chamber through holes in a
centrally placed circular tube or specifically arranged tubes with holes. These
holes are so sized and located that air comes out vertically in the form of jets
at velocities between 5 to 15 m/s. The high velocity jet causes an ejector action
and draws fluid from the bottom region. This region is connected to the hori-
zontal chamber containing fire wood. After the system is lit and turning on the
air flow, a small air stream is caused to flow through the horizontal chamber
containing the fuel. This flow causes gasification by providing enough heat to
cause pyrolysis. The char that is produced gets pushed on to the grate in the
bottom section of the combustion chamber. The pyrolysis gases flow through
the hot char bed and the gasification reactions proceed significantly in this
region. These gases move up by the ejector action (also aided by free convec-
tion due to the hot combustor wall) and burn up with the air to produce clean
combustion gases and high temperatures at the exit region. The ash tray at
the bottom plays an interesting role in addition to helping extract ash. If some
space is provided for air to be drawn into the combustion chamber, the air will
oxidize the char and generate hot gases with products of char gasification. If
the ash tray is closed ensuring no air flow from the bottom, the char conver-
sion will not take place and it will accumulate on the grate. After it is noticed
that firewood can no longer be pushed into the system because the char bed
on the grate is filled up, the char can all be extracted out, quenched with a ce-
ramic material (or water, if such a material is unavailable) and stored for use
as charcoal. By controlling the bottom tray spacing, one can consume all the
charcoal and create excellent combustion with peak efficiency. The difference
between the ejector stove and fixed biomass stove described earlier is that this
stove allows continuous operation. Both efficiency and emission performance
are slightly inferior to the the fixed biomass stove.

One of the key features of the above process is the ability it provides in control-
ling the undesired emissions with fixed supplies of primary and secondary air.

125
