13 Stoves, Burners, Combustors and Their Efficiency

124

the time the flame is confined around the wood pieces on the grate. It is also
seen from experience that the non-sooty good flame above the wood pieces
is somewhat finicky. It will be blown off easily, either by a slight wind or a
readjustment of the wood pieces. It may also turn out on occasions that the
flame around wood pieces on the grate is re-established. Whenever the non-
sooty flame above the pieces blows off, smoke issues. In this case, what is
happeningin the non-sooty flame is that the volatiles from the fuel wood and
air taken in from various holes or fuel inlet are mixed together before flame
is created. Hence, it is a premixed flame. The premixed flame requires good
conditions for it to be anchored. It is difficult to anchor it in a fluid stream
of non-constant velocity and so it tends to blow off easily. This is not so with
the diffusion flame around the wood pieces on the grate. It is indeed diffi-
cult to extinguish it once a few pieces are burning. This discussion implies
that premixed flame though more efficient is more unstable. Hence one needs
premixed flame for good combustion and diffusion flame for stability. A good
design therefore combines both the flame structures for optimal performance.

Several of these issues are addressed by using what is known as gasifier stove.
Figure 13.3 shows the sketch of such a stove.

The key point in this approach is to convert the solid fuel to a gaseous fuel and
then burn the gaseous fuel. The process of converting the solid fuel to gaseous
fuel is called gasification. It is also a combustion process, but conducted at
sub-स्टोइकोमेट्रिक conditions, at an equivalence ratio of about 0.25 to 0.3, that
corresponds to an air-to-fuel ratio of 1.7 to 1.8. In this procedure the fuel bed is
not ignited or burnt from the bottom with fuel pieces being added periodically
as has been done classically. Instead a prepared fuel bed of finer pieces of
biomass in a packed bed is lit from the top with some air flowing from the
bottom through the bed. This leads to the flame front moving through the bed
from top to the bottom consuming the fuel rather uniformly. A hot surface
at the top transfers heat to lower layers which ignite when the temperature
crosses the critical temperature (of 580-620 K for biomass and 700-850 K for
coal). At this time the solid mass releases some volatiles which get ignited
with air flowing around. This raises the gas temperature enabling transfer of
heat to the solid material. Hence, the temperature of the solid mass also goes
up after all the volatiles are released and the material becomes a char. The
flame front will move down to the bottom converting all the material to char
first and then consuming the char as well. There are two stages of reaction
here. The flaming sub-स्टोइकोमेट्रिक combustion leads to products CO, Ho,
COs, H50, and higher hydrocarbons. These pass through the char bed above
the flaming pyrolysis zone where the char reacts with H,O and CO, at high
temperatures to produce additional CO and H,. The higher hydrocarbons
crack down to smaller fragments and also react with surrounding gases.

This process is self-regulating: changes in air flow rate (+ / -) change the gasi-
