14 Fire Spread and Fire Prevention

Thus,

BN 1/3
Tr) (14.6)

V, = 2a, 7

Using this, one can get the flame speed for downward propagating flame over
thick sheets. In the case of thin sheets the earlier result which is independent of
buoyancy force holds good.

In the case of upward propagating flame, the flame accelerates over the sheet
because heat transfer occurs from the upper regions of the flame and the flame gets
initiated at several points even before the material is burnt up at the lower regions.

14.2 Bush and grassland fire

In the case of bush and grassland fire, the elements concerningthe fire spread are
the same as discussed above. In large fires radiation plays a significant role in
heat transfer. It may turn out that 50-70 % of the heat transferred to regions
surrounding the fire is due to radiation in the case of fires larger in size than about
a metre. One of the additional features responsible for fire movement concerns
fire brands. These are objects which are burning, but get separated from the main
material and move downstream due to wind and fall farther down and ignite new
materials. This can be a serious problem in large forest fires, particularly during
summer. One of the methods of overcoming forest fires started in this way would
be to create a reasonably wide strip of cleared land in close viscinity and ignite the
material at the edges all round. This ensures that the material inside will burn out,
thereby, limiting further damage. One of the features which helps such an outcome
is that the wind always moves towards the flame in the case of a large fire. This
is because the fires produce high enough plumes which draw air from all around to
‘feed themselves’.

Preventing fires is indeed an important task in domestic and industrial envi-
ronments. Fire hazards in materials like fabric, wood panels and panels made of
synthetic materials are handled by introducing fire retardants into the materials
by impregnation or coating. This leads us to the question: what reduces the prop-
agation of fires and flames? Large number of studies show that phosphorous and
halogen (C1, Br, I) compounds are very effective in reducing the propagation of fire.
Some of these materials (listed in Table 14.1) absorb large amount of heat and form
a char and, thus, prevent further transfer of heat and active radicals in promoting
combustion. Others interact chemically in reducing the rates of reaction. The latter
effect is particularly true of halogen based compounds.

Fire prevention techniques were by and large an art rather than a science, and it
is only in the last two decades that systematic attempts to understand the origin of
fire and its spread have led to effective measures for reducing the damages caused

136
