generated in two locations — gas turbine as well as steam turbine, typically
in 3:1 ratio. Such a strategy of using a fuel leads to conversion efficiency of
45 to 48 % and this operation is called integrated gasification combined cycle
(IGCO).

(b) It is possible to operate an ambient pressure gasifier, cool and clean the gas to
take it through a separate compressor and inject it into the gas turbine com-
bustion chamber with the other elements remaining the same. This scheme
entails some loss in efficiency because of the need for compressing the gaseous
fuel something not required when mined natural gas (usually available at
high pressures) is used directly.

(c) It is also possible to take the cooled and cleaned gas into a reciprocating engine,
the exhaust of which can be used in a steam cycle. The open cycle efficiency
of the reciprocating engine will itself be close to 40 %, leaving behind exhaust
of 3500 to 400 °C that is not as energetic as in the case of a gas turbine.
However, if the power of the exhaust is adequate to generate at least a few
MWe, it is possible to construct an IGCC system via this route. One of the
advantages is that reciprocating engines are far more tolerant to the quality
of maintenance than gas turbines. The combination of atmospheric pressure
gasifier and the more rugged reciprocating engine offers a lower-cost option
for power generation at lower power levels (~ 30 MWe).

(d) Smaller power systems down to even 10 kWWe can benefit from the gasification
process. Its use in reciprocating engines promises a solid fuel-to-electricity
conversion efficiency of at least 20 %. A well designed 100 kW e engine-alternator
system can promise a conversion efficiency of 25 %. Higher power engines of-
fer even higher efficiencies, exceeding 40 %.

(e) Several thermal applications needing gaseous fuel in a distributed gas arrange-
ment for multi-furnace operation in an industry can benefit from piped clean
gas from one gasification system that can run any or all the systems.

(f) Where a reduction operation is to be conducted in a metallurgical industry,
particularly with CO, one can use the gas directly in the operation. Usually
mined natural gas that is processed and piped is the normal fuel. With the
option of biomass-based producer gas as an alternate to natural gas, it is pos-
sible to generate an equivalent gas locally.

(g) If we interpret the gasification process itself as a staged combustion process
under sub-स्टोइकोमेट्रिक conditions (involving homogeneous combustion and
heterogeneous reaction with char as the two s) with further processing either
in a burner or an internal combustion system, one has more options for emis-
sion control.

141
