15 Solid Fuels - Combustion and Gasification

ture at which work is done will be lower, the conversion efficiency will be limited
due to thermodynamic considerations. The peak conversion efficiency from solid fu-
els to electricity in this process is about 36 — 38 % at large throughputs (hundreds
of tonnes per hour). The expectation is that if one uses a high pressure combustion
process as a part of the system, one can extract higher efficiency from the conver-
sion process. One can then ask a question: why not use the hot gases directly in
a reciprocating engine or a gas turbine. Reciprocating engines are essentially in-
ternal combustion engines that induct fuel gas and air from the atmosphere and
generate heat inside the cylinder at high pressure. They cannot induct the burnt
gases, for, no purpose would be served.

Gas turbine engines can utilise hot gases from a combustion system separately
located. In this case, however, the combustion system needs to be operated at high
pressures as indicated earlier. This would need high pressure fuel feed and ash ex-
traction systems. Further, the hot gases will need to be cleaned for fine particulate
matter to ensure that they do not cause erosion of the highly stressed hot blades
of the turbine. These additional systems will occupy space, there will be heat loass
from the bounding surface. One way of reducing the size of the clean up problem
would be to convert the solids to gas and clean up the gas before being used in
the combustion system. This would reduce the volume of the gas to be handled to
about a third of that for completely burnt condition. This makes the gasification
process attractive. There are several other benefits of the gasification process dis-
cussed below. The gasification process can be conducted with air or oxygen. When
the intention is to use the gas for power generation, air can be used as the oxidant.
In this case, one generates a gas that has about 20 % each of CO and H2, 1-2 %
CHy, 10 — 12 % CO and the remaining nitrogen. The combustibles in this case are
CO, H2 and C H2, with CO:H> in the ratio of 1:1. This gas is called producer gas in
literature.

If one needs to generate a synthesis gas to be used subsequently to produce a
liquid fuel, one uses oxygen and in this case, specific process design leads to a gas
with about 45 % CO, 22 % H, 6 % C H2, about 2 % of higher hydrocarbons and 25 %
CO. A CO:H; ratio of 2:1 is needed for producing methanol from this gas through
a catalytic process. The several benefits of the gasification process are as follows.

(a) In the case of gas turbines used at high power levels (several hundreds of
megawatt electric, MWe), the hot combustible gas from the high pressure
reactor is passed through a high pressure, high temperature candle filter to
separate the particulate matter before being used in the combustion chamber
of the gas turbine engine. A high temperature valve (~ 600 °C) controls the
flow rate into the combustor. The open cycle efficiency of the gas turbine en-
gine is about 35 %. The hot gases from the gas turbine are typically at 600
K and would in turn be used in a boiler to generate high pressure steam that
would be used in a steam turbine to generate electricity. Thus electricity is

140
