15 Solid Fuels - Combustion and
Gasification

Solid fuels appear in various forms: biomass, coal and synthetic polymeric solids.
Municipal solid wastes consist of bio-residues and synthetic polymeric solids. Most
of this matter has volatiles as well as fixed carbon (excepting non-charring syn-
thetic polymers like polyethelene). Combustion of these fuels involves two stages —
devolatilization with gas phase combustion and char combustion. Devolatilization
is also a gasification process, called pyrolysis. However, gasification, in a true sense,
implies conversion of solid fuels into gaseous fuels capable of being transported for
combustion over a distance, something not possible in the direct combustion pro-
cess.

Solid fuels are characterized by varying shapes and sizes, moisture fraction and
ash content. Bio-residues like wood chips, coconut shells, corncobs, bagasse, and
shells of seeds generally have a low ash content of about 1 %. Ricehusk, rice and
other straws have an ash content up to 20 %. Australian coals have an ash con-
tent of about 5 %. The ash content of indian coals could be as high as 50 %. Most
green biomass has a moisture fraction up to 60 %. Thin walled biomass like sugar-
cane leaves loose their moisture quickly. Thick-walled biomass like bio-stock takes
weeks to loose their moisture naturally. If they need to be used for thermal conver-
sion purposes, drying needs to be a part of the system. Thus, sizing and drying are
prerequisites of an efficient conversion process for these solid fuels. The ash result-
ing from the combustion process could be in fine form, and needs to be handled as
well.

Combustion of solid fuels has been discussed in Chapter 13 in connection with
stoves and combustors. One can raise a question now: If we can burn solid fuels ef-
ficiently with little emissions, why should there be a need for converting solid fuels
to gaseous fuels. If solid fuels are burnt, then it is imperative that the heat be ex-
tracted at the location of heat release. This is performed classically by burning fuels
on the grate of the combustion system or a fluid bed combustion system built along
with a high pressure steam boiler. The steam is subsequently used in a steam tur-
bine to generate electricity. One of the limitations of this approach is that whereas
the hot gases of combustion are typically at 1500-1700 K, the superheated high
temperature steam would reach only about 650 K. Since the peak cycle tempera-

139
