15.1 Pyrolysis, Combustion and Gasification process

If the air is drawn only from the top, the flaming pyrolysis front k moving up
continuously (typically at a rate of 150 to 180 mm/hr). Since the depth of the entire
reaction zone is about 0.5 to 0.75 m, this reactor will operate in the gasification
mode leaving behind about 15 % to 20 % char continuously. Thus the when the
flame front reaches the top, the reactor would be full of char. Beyond this point, it
will act like a charcoal reactor. This makes the operation of the reactor non-steady
and is undesirable for long continuous operations.

By introducing air in stages - one part at the top and another via the air noz-
zles, one can stabilize the flame front at some zone above the side air nozzles. The
gasification that occurs in the flame zone much above the side air nozzles allows
the gas to be re-burnt in the air nozzle area, thus raising the temperature of the
char bed again. This allows the higher hydrocarbons (tar) to be cracked substan-
tially, leading to a better tar reduction and also carbon conversion. An interesting
feature is that the tar fraction in the hot gas changes little with the throughput,
even at one-third of the nominal throughput. The technical reason for this obser-
vation is that the tar fraction is a combination of two factors — temperature and
residence time. While at higher throughputs the thermal profile is much better the
gas residence time is small, and at lower throughputs the temperature profile is
poorer but the residence time is higher. Measured tar levels with dry biomass are
less than 50 mg/nm? over a range of throughputs — implying over the turn-down
ratio, see Chapter 13). The other advantage of such a system design is that it is
possible to control the peak temperature while still managing to provide a broader,
high-temperature environment to enable tar cracking. Peak temperature control is
essential to ensure that ash fusion does not occur. This is particularly important
when handling feed stock like urban solid waste, where one can expect an inor-
ganic content up to 20 % with all the preprocessing scheme in position. With this
system design, one can capture nearly 80 % of the energy of the raw feed stock in
the gas. The gas composition containing higher fraction of hydrogen is favored in
this design (by 2 to 3 %). This is particularly helpful in obtaining higher conversion
efficiency in internal combustion devices that depend on flame propagation process.
The presence of higher hydrogen enhances the flame propagation speed and helps
more complete combustion and better realization of the energy in the gas.

There is an important and essential difference between the fixed bed downdraft
design and fluid bed design. In the former case any change in throughput can be
demanded and the gasification process picks up by itself. The char bed responds to
the increased flow rate of air and the conversion process stabilizes to the required
demand. In the case of fluid bed design, one has the freedom to fix the flow rates
of fuel and air independently. This may look like an advantage, but actually is
not. If one is operating in the gasification mode, the performance of the system
in terms of composition including tar is a strong function of the air-to-fuel ratio.
Changes toward richer or leaner condition alter the composition significantly. The
system elements downstream of the reactor will need to be designed to deal with

145
