16 Emissions from Combustion Systems

16.2 Why are they the pollutants and what are their health
hazards

16.2.1 Carbon dioxide

COs is a major product of combustion. Every kg of methane, gasoline and diesel
burnt produces 2.8, 3.1, 3.3 kg of CO, respectively. In India, about a hundred
million tonnes of liquid fossil fuels and five hundred million tonnes of coal are used
every year and these amount to the emission of CO; of about a billion tonnes.

COs is called a greenhouse gas as it absorbs the long wavelength radiation re-
flected by earth at 300 K into space (at 0 K). It is now established that the emis-
sion of CO, leads to global warming, and in recent times. substantial evidence has
been brought out by the important international agency, IPCC (Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change). The problems of global warming are vividly brought out
by the changes noted in the surface temperature of earth which had not changed
for a thousand years till about 1900 after which there has been a sharp rise by a
degree in the next hundred years. This change has been very clearly related to in-
dustrialization. Increasing concentrations of greenhouse gases are likely to further
accelerate the phenomenon of climate change. It is expected that the average global
surface temperature could rise by 2.5 °C in the next fifty years, and by 6 °C in the
next century, with of course, some regional variations. Evaporation will increase as
the climate warms, which will increase average global precipitation. Soil moisture
is likely to decline in many regions, and intense rainstorms are likely to become
more frequent. Sea level is likely to rise by as much as 0.6 m leading to inundation
of coastal cities and the possibility of Tsunami like activity.

16.2.2 Unburnt hydrocarbons, soot and solid particulate matter (SPM)

These are connected pollutants and are generally found as emissions from light mo-
tor vehicles running on gasoline as well as heavy motor vehicles running on diesel.
Particulate matter or suspended particles are a complex mix of organic and inor-
ganic substances in suspension in the air. Some of these are produced through
the combustion process. Oxidation of gaseous emissions such as sulphur dioxide
and nitrogen dioxide form acids in the air, which will then combine with ammo-
nia to form ammonium salts such as ammonium sulphate and ammonium nitrate.
Both these particular salts exist as solid particles at low humidity or as solution
droplets at higher humidity. Airborne particulate matter is usually described as
SPM (suspended particulate matter) and TSP (total suspended particulate matter).
The particulate matter which exists in the air as a result of combustion, though
smaller in concentration as a proportion of TSP, is of greater consequence to hu-
man and environmental health. The fine particulate matter emitted from engines

150
