15.1 Pyrolysis, Combustion and Gasification process

om In

 

 

<. Drying100°C .» = Gas Out
3 /
\ /
Pyrolysis 300° C!
Reduction 900° C
Combustion
> A x
!' 1! Je————— Throat
"Tf Cc
Combustion Grate
<--- Airln

 

Figure 15.1: Updraft gasification system

the air-to-fuel ratio for a fixed fuel feed rate. Fluidization velocities are typically
between 0.8 to 1.5 m/s. It is the sand bed that determines the fluidization velocity,
largely. Fluid bed combustion systems allow for strategies to control the emissions
of oxides of sulfur, chlorine based compounds nicely and are therefore a preferred
option for combusting coals.

When the fuel throughput is very large, the demand for minimizing the size of
the combustor for a given throughput leads to the use of circulating fluid beds. In
these systems, the air flowing at relatively large velocities — 7 to 10 m/s — carries
the bed material and the fuel feed through a vertical reactor. The bed material with
partly processed fuel is returned to the bottom from another section that separates
the gas from particulate matter.

Both fluid bed and circulating fluid bed combustors can be altered in their geo-
metrical construction to function as gasifiers by altering the air-to-fuel ratio to 25
to 30 % of the स्टोइकोमेट्रिक value. Since they operate at a fixed temperature and
the residence times are usually insufficient for complete conversion, the condensi-
ble fraction of the gas (tars) is substantive (~ 10 g/nm?). One needs to introduce
separate tar cracking systems (using dolomite or nickel-based high temperature
catalytic bed) before the gas becomes acceptable to gas turbines.

In a fixed bed operating in counter-current mode (called updraft systems), the
air moves up in a porous bed of the solid fuel that is moving down (see Fig.15.1). A
high temperature zone is created at the stage where air first meets with the fuel.
The fuel would have lost moisture and volatiles in the upper stages and hence it is
the hot char that reacts with air to generate combustible gases that are rich in COs.
This gas moves up, mixes with the volatiles and moisture generating a gas that has
a high fraction of condensibles. The gas taken out of the system has to be used in a

143
