16.2 Why are they the pollutants and what are their health hazards

is capable of penetrating deep into the lungs as it is generally too small to be fil-
tered by the systems of the nose and the throat. The fine black particles of diesel
engines (soot) may be impregnated with complex organic compounds like polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) which are suspected carcinogens. In fact, it is in-
creasingly being recognized that greater part is played by the particle size and less
by the total suspended particulate matter itself. Even at relatively low concentra-
tions, fine particulate matter seem to cause changes in lung function and increase
in cardiovascular and respiratory diseases (including asthma attacks). What is of
most concern is that there appears to be no safe limit for this type of air pollution,
and hence reducing the emissions from vehicles is sought through continuous re-
duction in the limits of several undesirable gases like carbon monoxide, oxides of
nitrogen, sulphur dioxide and halogens. We will now examine each of these pollu-
tants in some detail.

16.2.3 Oxides of nitrogen

Nitric oxide constitutes more than 90 % of the oxides of nitrogen. It is a reactive
gas, considered undesirable in automobile exhaust because of the role it plays in the
formation of photochemical smog. However, it has also many valuable physiological
functions in the human body.

NO is synthesized within human cells by an enzyme called NO synthase (NOS),
and is found in the neurons of the brain, in the cells that line the blood vessels and
in macrophages. It diffuses freely across cell membranes. It relaxes the smooth
muscle in the walls of the arterioles. It also inhibits the aggregation of platelets and
thus keeps inappropriate clotting from interfering with blood flow. There are many
more positive functions for NO in the human, animal and plant life cycle when they
are synthesized in the system. Nitroglycerine, which is often prescribed to reduce
the pain of angina, does so by generating nitric oxide, which relaxes the walls of
the coronary arteries and arterioles. (it is good to note that the Nobel prize to one
of the three winners, Ferid Murad, was thought particularly appropriate because
he showed how nitroglycerine works by releasing NO. Alfred Nobel's fortune came
from his invention of dynamite, made from nitroglycerine!)

However, when freely found in the atmosphere, the oxides of nitrogen are irri-
tant gases and their effects on the human respiratory system are observed in the
lower airways and the lungs since the aqueous surfaces of the upper airways retain
only small amounts of the inhaled oxides of nitrogen. Studies have shown that con-
centrations of oxides of nitrogen more than 1300 micrograms per normal cubic me-
ter causes functional changes in healthy subjects — particularly an increase in the
resistance offered by the airways. Inadvertent exposure to high concentrations of
oxides of nitrogen is expected to result in pneumonia, bronchiolitis and pulmonary
oedema.

151
