15 Solid Fuels - Combustion and Gasification

[ps In

    
   
 
 

  

 

 

 

Drying 100° C -—-> Gas Out
Pyrolysis 300° C

Combistion 110° C | 4
| Y !

ic 1

- <«------=Airln
| 4
* Throat

 

 

Regltction 900° C..~
& gon

mat] oe

 

 

 

Figure 15.2: Downdraft gasification system—Closed top World War II class design

combustion system very close to the gasification system lest the condensibles choke
the connecting piping. One of the advantages of such a system is that one can use
a variety of biomass or coal or material with high moisture fraction as well. The
ruggedness of operation however brings down its efficiency, for allowing significant
moisture in the feed stock is thermodynamically inappropriate. One can dry the
biomass by a low grade heat— from waste heat, for instance. This kind of approach
is common in European countries where the gas is burnt in boilers to help service
district heating applications. The liquid content in the gas is about 5 to 20 g/nm?,
too low to treat as a liquid fuel, too high to be ignored in the system design for clean
operations.

In fixed bed co-current systems, also called downdraft gasification systems (see
Fig. 15.2), the air is drawn through the solid fuel as it moves down.

In one system design called the closed top system ( Fig. 15.2) that originated
in Europe during world war II period and meant largely for wood chips, the air is
drawn from tuyeres surrounding the chamber carrying the fuel. During the oper-
ation, air burns up the biomass or coal to char and then reacts with the char to
generate a gas. The gas when cooled contains about 35 % to 38 % combustibles
and 15 % inerts (13 % CO», and 2 % H>0O) and some higher hydrocarbons (~ 100 to
500 mg/nm?). The temperature distribution in the high temperature zone is punc-
tuated with lower values in zones between the air injection nozzles. This leads to
enhanced tar generation, particularly at throughputs lower than the nominal.

The open top design (Fig. 15.3) that is more recent allows a better char partic-
ipation in tar conversion. Even so, some tar finds its way through the system at
lower throughputs, as described earlier. Hence, to run the open top system in a
closed top mode without a throat would not be a proper strategy.

144
