16 Emissions from Combustion Systems

16.1 The pollutants

In discussing emissions from combustion systems, we will need to consider the
emissions from furnaces of power plants, process industry, other industries, and
light and heavy-duty motor vehicles. We will exclude the emissions from rocket en-
gines even though these are not environment friendly (because exotic chemicals are
used), since these occur infrequently and do not constitute a significant fraction of
the emissions on an average.

All the fuels that are used in combustion devices are based principally on the
elements C, and H, with oxidant being O and ‘inert’ being N. Apart from these,
there are other elements like S and Cl present in the ‘fuels’ in a small quantity that
participate in the conversion process. High temperature chemical reactions are
dominated by C and H with O and the chemical pathways inevitably involve the
elements NN, S and Cl when these are present. The principal products of combustion
are CO, and H50. The other products of the combustion process are (a) UHC,
unburnt hydrocarbons including soot, (b) CO, carbon monoxide, (¢) NO, NO2, N2O,
(oxides of nitrogen, generally termed NOX referring to NO,,, where x can be 0.5,
1 or 2), (d) SO, and SOs, (oxides of sulfur) which emanate from sulfur present in
some fossil fuels (some oils and coal) and to a very tiny extent from biomass, and
(d) HCl and dioxins, the compounds of C, H, Cl, and O.

The emissions are quantified usually in terms of ppm in the exhaust at a certain
oxygen fraction (different people use different levels: 3, 5 or 10 %) and g/M J of heat
input. The emission index is best characterized by g/M J because it is related to the
amount of energy used in the process and hence energy efficiency is embedded in
the index. It also rationalises the fuel because fuels of different calorific values can
be conceived by users depending on the local fuel prices and the index will still be
true indication of the emission. In the case of motor vehicles, the emission indicies
are expressed in terms of g/km since it is this quantity that needs to be minimized.

149
