15 Solid Fuels - Combustion and Gasification

15.1 Pyrolysis, Combustion and Gasification process

Biomass has about 75 % volatiles and coal about 30 %. The processes that occur in
the conversion process are described as follows:

1. Solid (with moisture) — dry solid — char (at ~ 350°C") + volatiles

2. Solid (with moisture) + air — char + products of flaming combustion at sub-
स्टोइकोमेट्रिक conditions — ash + some unconverted carbon (with oxidant, like air)

If the aim is to obtain liquid fuel from the solids, one needs to heat the solids in
the absence of air like in option 1 above. When this is done, the biomass will release
moisture including bound moisture at a temperature less than 150 °C and volatiles
at temperatures of about 350 °C. After the devolatilization process is complete, one
obtains solid char (up to 30 %), some liquid components (3 to 50 %) and remain-
ing non-condensible gases like CO, COs, H2, CH; and higher hydrocarbons. If the
heating rate is low, there is enough time for reactions between various volatilized
components which lead to a small fraction of liquid components (about 3 to 5 %).
If the heating rate is very high (about 1000 °C per second), a large fraction is lig-
uid and if this is condensed immediately, one gets what is known as pyrolytic oil
that contains combustibles with 20 % water that forms azeotropic mixtures with
other liquids. The high heating rate demands that the solid be pulverized to fine
size. The liquid obtained from this process has a calorific value about half of liquid
fossil fuels. This liquid is difficult to ignite and its use therefore is limited to con-
tinuous combustion systems. While combustors meant for stationary applications
can accept the fuel without difficulty, to operate internal combustion engines like
gas turbines a higher degree of purification to eliminate fine char in the liquid is
required.

The thermal conversion process of coal or biomass with air to lead to a com-
bustible gas (gasification process) can be arranged in one of the several ways — fixed
bed, moving bed or fluid bed. In a fixed bed one can have the relative movement of
air and the solids in co-current, counter-current and cross-draft mode. The fuel in
a fixed bed moves down by gravity.

In combustion systems with a moving grate, solids are transported at the re-
quired rate over the grate and air is passed from underside of the grate partly and
over the grate partly. Air can be blown into the combustion system or drawn by
induction through a induced-draft fan located downstream, close to the chimney.

At relatively large throughputs, one uses a fluid bed combustion system. In this
system, the fuel is fed into a bed of sand that is maintained in a suspended condition
with bubbles of air moving up in a random way. The fuel is fed in the specified size
range into the bed. The fuel constitutes no more than 15 % of the bed material.
Because of intense movement of the solids and air, the bed temperature becomes
uniform and it is possible to maintain it in a narrow range by a suitable control of

142
