16 Emissions from Combustion Systems

Nitric oxide reacts with ozone (O3) in the atmosphere in the presence of ultravi-
olet light from the sun and generates nitrogen dioxide.

NO + O3 <> NOs + Oo (16.1)

In the presence of certain hydrocarbons (complex oxygenated hydrocarbons pro-
duced because of incomplete combustion in vehicles) the equilibrium that would be
established as per the relation (16.1) would be disturbed and more of NO; and Os
are found in the near-earth atmosphere.

Because ozone has limited solubility in water, the upper respiratory tract is not
as effective in scrubbing ozone from inhaled air. Consequently, majority of the in-
haled ozone reaches the lower respiratory tract and dissolves in the thin layer of
epithelial lining fluid (ELF) throughout the conducting airways of the lung. In the
lungs, ozone reacts rapidly with a number of biomolecules, following an exposure up
to 8 hours, leading to reductions in forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1)
and some or all of the following respiratory symptoms like cough, pain on deep in-
spiration, and shortness of breath. These effects are reversible, with improvement
and recovery time varying from a few hours to 48 hours.

At high altitudes there is protective Ozone layer that filters the harmful high
energy radiation which includes the ultraviolet radiation, limiting its penetration
to the surface layers of the earth. When an aircraft flying at a high altitude (like
Concorde during its service) releases oxides of nitrogen into the atmosphere, the
reactions noted above will work the other way and lead to reduction in the ozone
fraction and thereby to conditions where more harmful radiation reaches the earth’s
surface.

The release of these gases as well as those containing chlorine and bromine
through various human activities, particularly chlorofluorocarbons in aerosols, has
caused a gradual depletion of the ozone layer over North America, a large part of
South America and Asia, nearly the whole of Europe, Australia and New Zealand.
Consequently, harmful UV radiation that filters through these regions is known to
cause dryness and wrinkling of the skin and an increase in the incidence of skin
cancers.

16.2.4 Sulphur dioxide and halogens

The main sources of sulphur contaminated fuel are Coal, lignite and heavy fuel
oils. From an automotive point of view, high speed diesel is the largest contributor
of sulphur dioxide to the atmosphere. For petrol vehicles the quantity is around
0.02% by mass sulphur, whereas it is more like 0.2 % by mass for diesel fuel. Oxides
of sulphur are known to be so corrosive that its undesirable effects were known
earlier than those posed by oxides of nitrogen. Inhaled sulphur dioxide is highly
soluble in the aqueous surfaces of the respiratory tract, much more than the oxides

152
