16.2 Why are they the pollutants and what are their health hazards

of nitrogen, and is therefore absorbed in the nose and the upper airways where
it exerts irritant effects; little of it reaches the lungs. Sulphuric acid mist and
some sulphates are more powerful respiratory irritants than sulphur dioxide and
produce similar but more severe effects. The emission of oxides of sulphur into
the atmosphere is the cause of acid rain, due largely to the formation of sulphuric
acid (H250,) (and Nitric acid, HN Os, from the oxides of nitrogen) that has several
impacts. Acidic aerosols or tiny solid or liquid atmospheric particles with a high
acid content, when inhaled, lead to respiratory diseases. Acid rain can also lead to
the reduction in visibility due to sulphate aerosols. Impaired visibility is a safety
issue for airport traffic control. In addition, acid rain and acidifying pollutants can
accelerate corrosion of building materials such as stone, brick, concrete and metal.

Dioxins are compounds of chlorine, oxygen, carbon and hydrogen. The presence
of chlorine is essential for the fomation of a series of chlorinated compounds, the
most toxic of which is dioxin. This is largely produced in municipal waste incinera-
tion where the incineration system is usually coupled to high pressure boiler-steam
turbine system for power generation). It is also produced due to improper burning
of household trash, and in very limited amounts from natural processes like for-
est fires. Municipal waste contains footwear and waste rubber articles that have
polyvinyl chloride (PVC), combustion of which is the principal reason for dioxin.
The melting point of dioxin is 305 °C' and boiling point 412 °C. As such it is car-
ried through the boiler system and get deposited in varying amounts along the
way and a small fraction gets emitted into the atmosphere. The behavior of the
emissions appears not straightforward; on occasions, the emissions can become ex-
cessive because of collected material pealing off. Dioxins are extremely persistent
compounds, and they exist in the environment from both man-made and natural
sources. Studies have shown that while all humans have some dioxins in their
system due to their natural distribution in the environment, significant exposure
to dioxins at higher doses may cause chloracne that is a severe skin disease with
acne-like lesions that occur mainly on the face and upper body. Other effects of
exposure to large amounts of dioxin include skin rashes, skin discoloration, exces-
sive body hair, and possibly mild liver damage. One of the other health effects is
the risk of cancer in adults, particularly with long term exposure. While dioxin
emission has been a matter of considerable international concern, sugnificant re-
search effort has isolated the problems and found solutions to limiting its emission
in power generation systems using urban solid waste.

153
