16.3 How are the pollutants generated?

The important parameters that influence the formation of soot in such flames
are the parent fuel molecular structure, the flame temperature, the amount and
nature of diluents either in the fuel or in the oxidizer, pressure, and the flame—
premixed or diffusion. Diffusion flames have a greater tendency to soot, and higher
the flame temperature greater the soot fraction. Experiments have shown, in terms
of sooting tendency the ordering for diffusion and premixed flames as follows.

Aromatics (Benzene, etc) > Alkynes (Benzene, etc)
> Alkenes (Acetylene, etc) > Alkanes (Ethylene, etc) (Diffusionflames)
Aromatics > Alkanes > Alkenes > Alkynes (Premixedflame)

The ordering seems unsurprising with diffusion flames. However, the ordering in
the case of premixed flames is different and seems not easy to justify. For instance,
acetylene with a triple bond on C with a high C : H ratio, like benzene, should
be expected to soot more than ethane. However, the reverse is the case. The criti-
cal equivalence ratio beyond which sooting tendency is strong for acetylene (Cy H>)
occurs at 2.0, while for a straight chain hydrocarbon like ethane (Cy Hj), it occurs
at 1.7 and for n-octane (CgsHig) it is 1.4. This has made the investigation of the
fundamental mechanisms of sooting very interesting. Many well-designed experi-
ments have been conducted to elucidate the mechanisms. In premixed flames there
are two competing processes: (a) the oxidiser (Os, in air) and some radicals like the
hydroxyl (OH) reacting with the intermediates from the pyrolysis, and (b) the py-
rolysis process itself. The principal reactant goes through the chain reaction and
generates acetylene and some cyclic compounds including ring compounds. The
poly-aromatic hydrocarbons continue to react with acetylene, producing many com-
plex compounds that react with atomic hydrogen. This takes away hydrogen from
the compounds till a large soot particle emerges (CsH). The two processes, (a) and
(b) identified above are temperature-dependent; however, increased temperature
enhances the oxidation rate more than the the pyrolysis rate. Hence increased
temperature leads to reduced sooting tendency. If we recognize that the flame tem-
perature of acetylene is much higher than ethane or n-octane (see Table 4.8), it is
clear why acetylene has a higher equivalence ratio for sooting compared to ethane
or n-octane. An interesting correlation has been developed between the sooting
equivalence ratio and the number of carbon bonds in the fuel molecule. Ethane
has one bond and n-octane has 7 bonds. It is expected that n-octane should have
greater sooting tendency compared to ethane, a fact that is consistent with experi-
mental result.

Soot in a flame is not always undesirable. The multi-billion dollar carbon black
industry spends a considerable amount of research money investigating ways to
produce more soot with better specified characteristics. This soot eventually finds
its way into tires, toner cartridges, and many paints. In addition, continuum radi-
ation from soot produces the better radiant heat transfer from many non-premixed

155
