16 Emissions from Combustion Systems

16.3 How are the pollutants generated?

16.3.1 Unburnt hydrocarbons (UHC), Carbon monoxide and Soot

The generation of these pollutants depends on whether the combustion process is
premixed or diffusion limited. It also depends on the combustion device which may
allow only a certain residence time for the combustion process.

Most furnaces/stoves using gaseous fuels can be relatively easily designed and
can be operated at slightly lean mixture ratiosfor obtaining high combustion effi-
ciency while ensuring very low emissions of UHC, CO and soot. If more emissions
than optimum is observed, then it is usually due to a defect in the equipment or its
management.

The emission of the above components from a carbureted, gasoline-based engine
is due to a few reasons. There is a quench layer next to the walls where the fuel will
collect along with the thin layer of lubricant. This will get scraped occasionally and
will get into the gas phase where the conversion remains incomplete and one could
get some unreacted gasoline, some intermediate products of combustion including
CO and some soot as well. Under low operating loads, it may also lead to incomplete
flame propagation. Two-stroke engines are greater culprits compared to four-stroke
engines.

Even when UHC emissions are negligible, it is possible to have significant CO
emissions. CO is a slowly oxidizing fuel. The burning velocity of CO with dry air is
pitifully low - about 0.1 m/s. Addition of water vapor will raise the burning velocity
to about 0.25 m/s, still lower than the burning velocity of natural gas. The key
reaction step responsible for the change is CO + OH «+» CO, + H. A less important,
but relevant reaction is CO+HO5 <» CO+0OH. The OH and HO- (peroxide) radicals
get generated in the presence of H.O along other classical pathways. Because the
reactivity of CO is lower, it takes longer time for its conversion compared to other
hydrocarbon fragments (that take other paths to complete conversion) and hence,
it ends up in the exhaust.

Soot has been discussed briefly in chapter 13 in connection with wood stoves. It
is a product of rich combustion with a set of compounds called polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons (PAHs) acting as precursors. These PAHs coagulate into larger
structures which condense into clear, tarry substances thought as nascent soot par-
ticles. Over time, surface growth kinetics converts these particles into black, spher-
ical, primary soot particles with diameters of approximately forty nanometers. The
particles collide with each other, conglomerate or agglomerate into larger particles.
Newly-formed soot particles are especially hazardous because they have very high
PAH loadings. Part of the overall concern about soot as a carcinogen is that PAHs
remain attached to the soot particles and are transported into the lungs along with
the soot.

154
