16.5 Strategies for emission reduction

16.5.3 Sulphur oxides

Current emission standards on sulphur oxide emissions are very strict and are met
by post-combustion treatment of the exhaust gases. In coal-based power stations,
this is achieved by scrubbing, i.e., mixing the exhaust gases with water droplets
that contain limestone, which reacts with the oxide according to CaCO3 + SOs +
0.509 — CaSO4 + COs. The scrubbers are expensive and they constitute a signifi-
cant fraction of the cost of a modern coal power station.

In fluid bed systems, the addition of limestone to the feed ensures the absorption
of sulphur oxides into the condensed phase. Sulphur is also a problem with diesel
and residual oil. Specifications on diesel ensure that sulphur fraction is very low
- less than 0.3 %. Residual oil that is used for combustion in industries generates
significant sulphur oxides. These gases need to be scrubbed to ensure that the ox-
ides are not emitted into the stack. A dilute alkaline spray wash helps in retaining
the oxides within the industry for off-line treatment.

16.5.4 Oxides of nitrogen

Reducing NO in combustion systems has been a major preoccupation of the com-
bustion scientists and industry for the past two decades (and continues to be so
even now). It is recognized that its production is low in fuel rich regions, lower
flame temperature and with shorter residence times. All these factors are used for
reducing the NO emission. The following schemes describe the alternatives.

Lean burn scheme: Whereever possible, one can use lea,n premixed combustion
with a low flame temperature. This is however thermodynamically inefficient
and usually not adopted.

Rich-Quench-Lean: This is a technique generally adopted in gas turbines, where
a rich flame is used in the primary zone of the combustor (for stability); rapid
mixing with air lowers the temperature to reasonable levels quickly, and then,
the extra fuel burns under lean conditions. Various variants of the scheme are
used in all low NO, burners. The aim always is to minimize the residence time
in the high-temperature region.

Ammonia injection: The NO emitted from coal combustion is controlled by react-
ing it with a reducing agent like ammonia.

Reburn: This technique employs the inverse of prompt mechanism. Extra fuel is
injected after the first flame for extra power and for transforming the NO back
to No.

Use of catalyst: The NO emitted from gasoline engines is reduced by a catalyst in
the exhaust.

159
