16 Emissions from Combustion Systems

EGR: The use of exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) reduces the flame temperature for
both premixed and non-premixed flames. There are ways of arranging EGR in
combustion chambers in which the oxidiser and fuel jets are introduced sepa-
rately at high velocity (50 to 100 m/s) from a base so that the burnt gases are
entrained into the fuel and oxidiser streams. This process allows the mixing
to occur without reaction till a stage when the fuel and the oxidiser fractions
have been brought down to low levels while the temperature has risen to about
1200 K. In this condition the entire system works almost like a stirred reac-
tor. This process reduces the peak temperature by about 100 to 150 K and
helps reduce the emission of thermal NO,.

Air preheat: Use of preheated air for the same flame temperature allows very lean
operation and hence decrease in prompt NO generation.

16.5.5 UHC

Release of UHC from industrial burners is not a very serious issue because ample
residence time can usually be given to the reactants inside the combustion cham-
ber. Meeting the UHC emission standards for diesel engines calls for fine atom-
ization of diesel and good mixing of it with air inside the cylinders. In the case of
spark-ignition engines the emission standard is met by fitting a catalyst, generally
a three-way catalyst, which achieves simultaneously the oxidation of UHC, CO and
the reduction of NO. For this to be possible, the mixture has to be very close to sto-
ichiometric condition, which motivates partly the use of complex electronic engine
management control systems in modern cars.

The exhaust is passed over a usually precious metal surface of platinum, nickel,
rhodium, etc, that has a very high surface area. The action of the metal is to cat-
alyze the particular reactions related to oxidation of UHC and CO and the reduction
of NO to N», so that its rate is high even at low temperatures (~ 400-900 K). The
mechanism of catalysis involves the diffusion of the reactants towards the surface,
their adsorption by the metal surface, particularly in the active sites where the re-
actants meet to form the product. This product is then desorbed back to the gas
phase, to be removed by mass transfer (diffusion) into the bulk stream (adsorption
means a chemical bonding between the reactant molecule and the atom (s) on the
metal and desorption implies the breaking of this bond). The rate of the overall
process depends on the nature of the catalyst, the temperature, and the fluxes of
the gas inside the catalytic bed. Catalyst can degrade with time due to impurities
and poisoning, particularly from sulphur compounds. Hence the fuel is processed
to remove all the sulphur in catalyst-fitted cars.

Table 16.1 sets out many of the above observations to enable a quick apprecia-
tion.

160
