16 Emissions from Combustion Systems

The emissions from an engine as measured at the exhaust pipe with a range
of fuels varies from 2 to 10 g/M J for CO, 0.05 to 0.2 g/M J for NO, and 0.01 to
0.1 g/MJ for UHC. The measured levels can exceed the allowed values in specific
cases and in such cases, the engines need an exhaust treatment using a three way
catalyst or a similar system to limit the emissions to allowed levels.

Limits for dioxin in various western countries expressed as tolerable daily in-
take are typically, 1 to 10 pg per kg bodyweight (1 pg =10~'2¢). Because the toxicity
is high even at low levels, and all improvements are related to bringing the mag-
nitude to very low levels fine measurement systems are required to be designed to
obtain these values accurately.

16.5 Strategies for emission reduction

16.5.1 Carbon dioxide

The emission of CO, can be brought down only by improving the efficiency of the
process that uses any of the fuels (reducing kg fuel per unit product output, the
output being electricity or a certain distance moved or a physical product). Replac-
ing fossil fuels by renewable fuels (that can be generated at least at the same rate
as its use) so that neutrality of CO, production is achieved is another approach ac-
tively being pursued in recent times. The argument that if we replace fossil fuels
by biomass it is adequate to meet the obligation of CO, reduction has some subtle
aspects. Biomass is used as the primary fuel in stoves for domestic applications.
In most parts of the world, the stove is operated with inadequate air-to-fuel ratio
control leading to emissions of UHC and CO. This is partly due to stoves being
used in regions where no electricity is available, and so the ever varying and fluc-
tuating inflow of air into the combustion space due to buoyancy is all a certainty.
The greenhouse effect of some of these gases is substantive andit is argued that a
well-managed fossil fuel stove would produce lesser green house gas effect in com-
parison to poorly burning biomass stove. The key requirement then is to ensure
a biomass stove design that delivers high combustion efficiency, something that is
consistent with the burning of pollutants as completely as possible.

16.5.2 Carbon monoxide

The CO emission from industrial sources is minimized by ensuring some excess
air and a good mixing of the fuel and the air. Increased excess air implies larger
in-house power consumption for delivering this air. Hence, careful optimization is
needed to allow a minimum of excess air. In the case of automobiles, one needs to
use a catalyst to burn off the more-than-prescribed CO.

158
