16 Emissions from Combustion Systems

flames. This helps increased heat transfer to the walls in a boiler. Thus, soot is
desirable under some conditions, and other times very undesirable.

Diffusion dominated situations—Fuel oil burners, diesel and fuel oil combustion
in reciprocating engine cylinders and kerosene combustion in gas turbine combustor—
are characterized by a combustion process where fuel rich regions and oxidizer rich
regions are inevitable. Thus the combustion process is characterized by a whole
range of stoichiometries. Hence there is no escape from the production of several of
the undesired intermediate compounds. What is pertinent is whether enough mix-
ing takes place subsequently and whether the mixed conditions provide the tem-
perature and composition structure and residence time for the burn-out of these
undesired species. Usually, at full throughput conditions the thermal environment
is favorable for the reduction of these pollutants to low levels. At part loads and
accelerating conditions, however, conditions can be severe. In reciprocating engines
the air flow rate into the cylinder is always constant and the fuel flow rate is varied
depending on the load. Thus the air-to-fuel ratio varies from a very large value at
no-load condition to values little above stoichiometry at full load. In fact, the full
load is determined by the criterion that a specified air-to-fuel ratio be maintained
to limit the emissions - UHC in the form of smoke and perhaps, oxides of nitrogen.

There are several instances where a standard equipment like a burner that
would initially be using lighter oil as a fuel with acceptable emissions would turn
out to generate significant emissions subsequently essentially because, the costly
lighter oil would have been replaced by a cheaper heavier one. The C : H ratio
would be more adverse (becoming higher) making it difficult for the combustion
process to cope with the ‘more difficult’ fuel. In such a case, it may be necessary to
alter the equipment designed for the lighter fuel substantially or even abandon it.

16.3.2 Oxides of nitrogen, NO,

Of the oxides of nitrogen, the principal pollutant is NO. Other oxides of nitrogen
form a very small fraction of NO,. Even so, nitric oxide is a necessary ingredient of
our life cycle.

The oxides of nitrogen get generated through three routes: (i) thermal route
leading to ‘thermal NO’, (ii) hydrocarbon-fragment related route leading to ‘prompt
NO’, and (iii) fue- bound nitrogen leading to ‘fuel-bound NO’. The thermal route is
by far the most important route. About 90 % NO is captured by it. It involves the
reactions as follows.

O+ Na+ NO+ N (16.2)
N+0Oy+ NO+O (16.3)
N+OH < NO+H (16.4)

The first two reversible reactions are the Zeldovich mechanism. When the last

156
