16.4 Allowed Emissions

reversible reaction is included, the reaction set is termed Extended Zeldovich mech-
anism. The two principal controlling factors that affect the formation of NO are
temperature and oxygen fraction. Staying in the oxidizer-rich region of the stoi-
chiometry, close to the highest temperature generates the largest NO. Allowing
first part of the combustion to occur on the rich side and providing small residence
time toward the oxidiser-rich side helps limit the NO generation. A simple corre-
lation that delineates the role of the residence time and flame temperature reads
as

r

NOg(g — mole/cm®) ~ 70-20) exp(—16400/TF) (16.5)

where NO, is the emission at स्टोइकोमेट्रिक conditions and 7 is the adiabatic flame
temperature at stoichiometry. 7. is the residence time interpreted as the volumetric
throughput divided by the volume of the combustion chamber.

16.4 Allowed Emissions

The allowed emissions depend on the legislative measures adopted by a country.
While it is true that in some instances the adoption of a newer more environmentally—
benign technology has had accompanying economic benefits, in many cases, new
investments are called for. Hence, apart from the availability of the technology, it
is the preparedness to adopt the clean up process that matters most. In most ad-
vanced countries the emission norms are set up after the government goes through
a wide consultative process. The norms are revised after a periodic review and
they are variously expressed depending on the specific application in each coun-
try. Some countries have more stringent norms than others. In recent times these
differenceshave been narrowing due to greater awareness. Over the last 25 years,
when the environmental load has increased due to the increased population and
industrialization, more and more stringent norms have been imposed using newer
technologies that have resulted from greater understanding of the pollutant forma-
tion in systems. The allowed emissions depend on the application — light motor
vehicles using gasoline or diesel, heavy transport vehicles using diesel, stationary
power generation systems, stationary thermal systems (furnaces, stoves, etc). The
emissions for motor vehicles are expressed in terms of g/km. For stationary ap-
plications it is expressed in terms of g/M J (or g/kWh, g/bhphr). For light motor
vehicles, a simple equivalence may be obtained by taking, say, a 15 km/liter fuel
performance. This implies that 1 g/km is about 0.36 g/M J. For a heavy transport
vehicle, one can take 4 km/liter fuel performance, implying that 1 g/km is about
0.09 g/M J.

For light motor vehicles, the allowed emissions of CO, NO, and UHC were set
at 50, 2.5, and 6.1 g/km in 1960. In 2004, these have been brought down to 1, 0.12
and 0.08 g/km respectively. For heavy transport vehicles it is 6, 1.5 and 1.5 g/M J
respectively. Smoke should be limited to 0.02 g/M J for heavy vehicles.

157
