17 Explosives - Solid and Liquid

17.1 Propellants and Explosives

Propellants and explosives are substances containing fuel and oxidiser in a single
molecule (or mixed together), or those which are in an unstable molecular configura-
tion such that on appropriate initiation they burn slowly (a few to about a hundred
mm/s), or they burn up very fast (at speeds of about a few to ten km/s). This ratio of
a million in terms of regression rate distinguishes propellants from explosives. Pro-
pellants burn slowly or deflagrate while the explosives explode or detonate. Quite
often, the word explosion is used to connote situations where pressure rise in a
confined chamber occurs very fast, some times leading to its rupture. Such situa-
tions do not constitute detonation. It is deflagration coupled with confinement that
causes the pressure to rise and hence, to an explosion. Thus, all explosions are not
detonations, whereas all detonations are surely explosions.

17.2 Deflagration and Detonation

Deflagration occurs in premixed gases and solid propellants, subjects discussed in
Chapters 6 and 12 respectively. Typical speeds of solid regression rates (or defla-
gration rates) are 0.2 to 10 m/s (note that this is highly subsonic), and the flame
thickness is about 0.2 to 5 mm — smaller the thickness, larger the propagation
speed.

Detonations can occur in gaseous mixtures. reactive liquids and solids. Det-
onations, as a rule, propagate at supersonic speeds. Detonation speeds can vary
between 2 to 10 km/s and the thickness over which the structure spreads varies
between 0.02 to 20 mm depending on whether the propagation is occurring in a
gaseous mixture at high or low pressure, or in a liquid, or a solid. The mechanism
of the detonation is the same in all cases. It gets initiated with a supersonic wave
passing through the unburnt material. Just upstream of the supersonic wave (in
the case of a gas phase, within a few mean free paths or in the case of condensed
phase, molecules in close proximity), reactions occur and heat is released and the
wave propagation is sustained as a detonation wave.

163
