17 Explosives — Solid and Liquid

are many other substances which detonate easily but deflagrate with difficulty. Ni-
trocellulose, one of the main ingredients in propellants and explosives, deflagrates
easily, does not detonate if the nitrogen content in it is much lower than 12 %.
Beyond this value of nitrogen, it would detonate. Ammonium perchlorate (AP),
the mainstay of composite solid propellants, does not even deflagrate at ambient
conditions. It requires a minimum pressure (called low pressure deflagration limit,
LPDL) before self-deflagration is possible. It is very difficult to detonate AP. Ammo-
nium nitrate is both a propellant ingredient as well as an explosive. When mixed
with a binder and made into a propellant or when stored in small amounts, it is
"docile" — it only deflagrates on initiation. However, when stored in large amounts
as happens during transportation in ships (ammonium nitrate is also an indus-
trially needed chemical for fertilizers), a small fire in the hold can transform into
a detonation — a phenomenon known as deflagration-to-detonation transition al-
ready alluded to. Among substances which can be used both as propellants as well
as explosives are RDX [cyclotrimethylene trinitramine, C3 Hg N3(NO2)3] and HMX
[cyclotetramethylene tetranitramine, Cy Hg N,(NO3)4]. ‘When these substances are
made into a propellant, they can be ignited to deflagration and detonation-initiation
procedures (like shocks) do not cause detonation since the propellants contain other
materials which prevent excitation to detonation. However, when the substances
are held pure, shock initiation leads to detonation (see later).

In the category of detonating substances that are difficult to initiate into defla-
gration, trinitrotoluene (TNT, C7; H;N30g) is a clear example. A blow from a deto-
nator, or friction can initiate TNT into detonation. Further when TNT is confined
in a tube, a strong initiation by deflagration can transition itself into detonation.
However, lighting TNT at ambient pressure is not easy, though possible.

Applications needing energetic substances usually demand only one feature -
deflagration or detonation. All thrust generating propulsion systems for launch ve-
hicles or missiles use propellants which deflagrate. In order to initiate combustion
or ignition, heat sensitive explosive material is used. Detonating explosives used
in military hardware like hand grenade, sharpnel shell, bomb, shaped charges for
piercing armours and other applications like line mine clearing charge to clear the
mine infested field; and in civilian requirements like underground coal mine oper-
ations, explosive forming for cladding vessels for industrial operations, quarrying,
seismic prospecting and others. When the requirement is of detonation, one does
not want deflagration mode of functioning. An example of this is in mining. In an
underground mine, if a section of the material is to be dislodged through the use of
explosives, one must only have detonation and no deflagration. The latter is unac-
ceptable since the atmosphere may have combustible gas like methane—air mixture
which might lead to propagation of deflagration resulting in a gaseous explosion.

168
