17 Explosives — Solid and Liquid

Table 17.1: Properties of explosive compounds (HMX: Cyclo-tetra-methylene tetra-
nitramine; RDX: Cyclo-tri-methylene tri-nitramine; PETN: Penta erythritol tetra nitrate:
TNT: Tri-nitrotoluene; AN: Ammonium nitrate; NG: Nitro-glycerine (L = liquid); NC: Nitro-
cellulose)

 

Explosive Density Detonation Detonation Comments
kg/m? Velocity Pressure
km/s /1000 atm

 

HMX 1900 9.1 387 Very Stable
RDX 1810 8.9 341 Desensitizing needed
PETN 1770 8.3 340 Sensitive, Expensive
TNT 1640 6.9 189 Not sensitive
AN 900 2.0 - Explosive in large amounts
Used with other compounds
NG(L) 1600 7.0 - Very sensitive
used with other compounds
Lead Azide 4000 5.2 156 Very sensitive,

Primary explosive

 

When the explosives are used for blasting, as may happen in the building of
tunnels, quarrying, and earthwork, fragmentation should be avoided and hence
there is need to control the explosive intensity. One of the recent applications pf
explosives has been in the demolishing of old and dilapidated buildings in avery
short duration. In this technique, explosives are located at several locations in the
building and initiated with appropriate time delays — half to a few seconds with
explosives in the interior portions initiated earlier. This process enables complete
containment of the explosion and even the nearest buildings do not experience any
residual effects.

The measure of the intensity of an explosive is the detonation velocity which
also implies the peak pressure developed during the explosion. Table 17.1 shows
the data on several explosive compounds. The detonation velocities of HMX. RDX
and PETN are so high that they can create a very high detonation pressure which
is an indication of the destructive potential of the material. A smaller amount
of these substances is adequate to create the same damage potential as a larger
amount of other substances. TNT, on the other hand, is a not a powerful explosive.
Power described this way is different from the sensitivity of the material to thermal
or shock inputs. That HMX is very stable implies that unless the right input is
provided, it will not detonate. On the other hand, the fact that PETN or NG is
extremely sensitive implies that they are susceptible to some random input like
friction, slight temperature rise or dropping of the container to the ground from a
short height which can lead to explosion. They need extreme care in handling. To
alleviate this problem, mixed compositions have been developed. They are listed in
Table 17.2. In the list of explosives in the Table 17.2, "poly" refers to a polymer

166
