17.3 The substances

17.3 The substances

Detonating substances have been known to humankind for nearly 600 years. The
first substance that was developed was the gunpowder with a typical composition
of 75 % KNOs3, 15 % C and 10 % S, which held sway till about a hundred and fifty
years ago when gun-cotton or nitrocellulose was discovered. Further discoveries
were of nitro-glycerine followed by tri-nitrotoulene, all within a few decades. Al-
fred Nobel is credited with establishing of the field by systematic work on methods
of handling these dangerous substances in addition to inventing other additives —
oxidising salts like nitrates and other combustibles to make ordinary blasting ex-
plosives. It was in 1920 that the explosive property of RDX was discovered, even
though this compound was synthesised in 1899. These dominated the field till about
fifty years ago when ammonium nitrate, sensitised by fuel oil as a cheap commer-
cial explosive, and other variants of the same were explored. There are a variety
of compositions available today to meet the objective, commercial or military, con-
structive or destructive, with the desired precision at a minimum cost! In military
applications, one needs store sensitive materials in not-too-benign an environment,
sometimes subject to hazards of heat and shock. Therefore, safety demands that
less sensitive explosives be deployed. If a more sensitive material needs to be used,
it has to be appropriately desensitised with the addition of binders. Such a re-
quirement has led to the development of what are known as plastic-bonded explo-
sives.Explosives are designed mainly to serve the following roles: (i) anti-personnel
device (like grenade) which calls for fragmentation leading to high speed of the
fragments, (ii) blastimg device for inflicting structural damage over an area and
(iii) penetration device to perform armour-piercing action. The more recently de-
veloped fuel-air explosives may be used as an anti-personnel device. In missile
applications, where the explosive material is to be carried as a payload, one would
like to carry minimum mass to achieve the desired destructive result (an extension
of this concept leads to nuclear warheads instead of conventional warheads of the
kind discussed here).

In commercial use of explosives, minimisation of cost per unit output becomes
important in their choice. On the technical side. when used in underground mines,
the safety of the mine itself has to be ensured. Most underground mines release
methane as a consequence of long term bio-genic activity. This gas can combine
with air from the atmosphere to form combustible mixtures in some pockets, though
the design of operation of the mine would aim at flushing these gases out. If the
explosive were to release hot gases for a time duration over which ignition of the
gaseous mixture can occur, the entire gaseous mass can deflagrate and this can
lead to deflagrative explosion. Hence, the design of the explosive should be such
that on its operation, only a blast wave should be generated and very little gas or
residual hot particles that can cause further ignition of the surrounding mixture be
generated.

165
