17.5 Uses of Explosives In Missiles/Launch Vehicles

since the basis of the phenomenon lies in known conservation equations, albeit with
uncertainty in the equation of state, a feature overcome through calibration with
detonation data.

One of the other methods of obtaining a blast wave of sufficient strength is to
create a mixture of fuel and air (a fine spray of kerosene into a large volume of
air) and initiate this mixture by an explosive. Then the blast wave propagates
through the mixture and its over-the-surface damage potential is very high. These
explosions can inadvertently get created even in fine pulverized coal dust-in-air or
solid food powder-in-air environments as well.

17.5 Uses of Explosives In Missiles/Launch Vehicles

The idea of primary, booster and main charges described earlier are valid even
for rocket propulsion ignition systems. One uses an electrically initiated primary
charge, a booster or igniter charge and the main propellant in small rocket motors.
In large rocket motors, the igniter charge is replaced by pyrogen motor. The propel-
lant is also respected as an explosive, albiet a weak one. Launch vehicles use det-
onating substances to do a variety of functions. In flight, for example, pyrovalves,
cable cutters, explosive bolts, explosive latches, explosive zip, flexible linear shaped
cords are used for several functions. Pyrovalves are used to connect a high pressure
line to downstream element otherwise positively disconnected because of safety re-
quirements. Explosive bolts are used to separate the elements on demand. Flexible
linear shaped cords are used for stage separation and also in vehicle destruct sys-
tems which need to get activated in case the vehicle deviates from the intended
path. The principles used in the design of these systems are the same as described
earlier.

17.6 Explosion and Detonation - Simple analyses

To understand the subject of explosives in condensed phase, it is useful to briefly
review the phenomenon in gaseous mixtures. Gaseous mixtures of fuel and ox-
idiser can be detonated through the impingement of shock waves; some mixtures
also have a tendency to move from deflagration to detonation. The understanding of
which combination will detonate and which will not is still empirical, and the deter-
mination has to depend on experiments for gaseous or condensed phase substances;
however, at what speed will it detonate and what is the structure of the detonation
are questions that have been answered to a significant extent, certainly for gaseous
mixtures. One-dimensional conservation equations of mass, momentum and en-
ergy for a gaseous medium are analysed, with the energy equation having one term

171
