17 Explosives — Solid and Liquid

In a typical one-dimensional view, the mass conservation relations are the same
across the waves (deflagration and detonation). Pressure is nearly constant and
momentum equation plays a marginal role in deflagration, whereas in the case of
detonation, pressure varies significantly and the momentum equation plays a sig-
nificant role. This is also consistent with the momentum carried by the fluid in the
two cases. In the case of deflagration, the magnitude of pU? is about 0.2 Pa (= 2
x 107% atm) for most fuel-oxidant mixtures; it is 100 Pa for Ho—O, mixture at its
highest propagational speed. For a typical detonation in a solid explosive, the dif-
ference in pressure would be 1000 to 10000 M Pa! In the case of deflagration, the
energy and species conservation equations play a major role with the rate of chem-
ical reaction as the important feature while in the case of detonation, the energy
equation plays an important role and species conservation a minor role. One can
obtain an approximate detonation speeds without having to write the differential
form of the conservation equations in the case of gaseous mixtures. This approach
is known as Chapman—Jouguet treatment. In this treatment it is taken that the
critical speed of propagation causes the burnt zone to reach acoustic speed, a fea-
ture that is the limiting condition for supersonic flows with heat addition (in this
case, chenical heat release). Only if one needs the structure of the detonation does
one need to treat differential form of conservation equations. In the case of liquids
or solids, even though the phenomenology is the same as that of gaseous mixtures,
it is not possible to compute the detonation speeds because, the equation of state
for the burnt ases is not known at the extreme conditions that prevail in this zone —
pressures in the range of hundreds of thousands of atmospheres even though tem-
peratures of 5000 K are obtained. In the case of deflagration, one needs to treat the
differential form of equations to obtain speeds of propagation; simultaneously, the
structure of the flame gets determined.

Detonation can be caused in a transition from deflagration, even in the case
of a gaseous flame propagating in a duct. More frequently, it gets generated by a
shock wave which itself could be triggered by a hammer blow, a pistol shot through
a material or by friction (particularly with a rusted knife) or when the size of the
material is large enough for thermal runaway reactions to proceed in the condensed
phase. Detonation speed is largely independent of reaction rate though reaction
is an important ingredient of the mechanism for sustaining the detonation. It is
strongly dependent on the magnitude of the heat release. Detonations in condensed
phase are affected by two- and three-dimensional effects significantly. Even so,
the departure of the observed speeds from the calculated detonation speeds is not
large and can be explained, at least qualitatively. There are also limits in terms of
mixture ratio for the propagation of detonation in gases. These limits usually fall
between the composition limits of propagation for deflagration (see flammability
limits, Chapter 7).

164
