17.4 Structure of explosives and Warheads

17.4 Structure of explosives and Warheads

The structure of the explosive is generally as follows. The main charge that provides
the destructive effect will be based on one of the several compositions described in
Tables 17.1 and 17.2. These are triggered into detonation by a booster charge which
itself is triggered by what are known as initiating explosives. The initiating explo-
sives are usually selected from heat sensitive compounds like Lead Azide, Lead
styphnate, Mercuric fulminate, etc., in small quantities usually deposited around
a thin nichrome wire and covered with a thin plastic coat. Whenever detonation
is desired, an electric current, typically, 0.7 to 1.0 amp is passed through the wire.
This leads to a tiny explosion and fire that is caught up by the booster charge that
converts the small outburst into definite small blast with sufficient shock strength
to kick-start the detonation of the main charge. Typical primary initiating detona-
tion charge is about 0.1 to 0.5 g. The booster charge is about 50 to 200 g. The main
charge varies from as small as 100 g to as large as 500 kg depending on the applica-
tion. Booster compositions are developed from the same materials but at different
composition levels.

In hand grenades, the shell is filled with explosive material, the amount of ex-
plosive depending on the desired damage potential. The surface of the shell is cov-
ered with grooves to enable fragmentation in an intended way and at the centre
is located a pin, initially held tight. When it is to be operated, the safety catch is
removed and grenade is thrown. Once the top of the pin hits a hard surface it hits a
small cap filled with a primary explosive. This starts a delay segment booster for a
few seconds and then the main charge is detonated. In the case of drop bombs. the
design is somewhat similar, excepting that the fragmentation facility is not called
for.

Two major concepts in warhead design aimed particularly at armour piercing
capability are the shaped charge and explosively formed penetrator (EFP). The fun-
damental principles of these are depicted in Fig. 17.1. In the case of shaped charge
warhead, initiation takes place at the sharp cone end. This engulfs the cone, melts
the metal outer sheath into high speed jet around the axis segment and directs the
slug into the target. The performance of the high speed metal jet is indeed spectacu-
lar. The effect is termed Monroe effect or Neumann effect. There is no specific need
to shape the charge in the form of a cone. It could be in the form of a hemisphere
or a part of a sphere. In such a case, one generates a spherical melted blob of high
velocity instead of a jet. The understanding in this area has improved dramatically
in the last ten years through the use of computational tools normally termed hy-
drocodes. They are used to describe various features such as (a) the formation of the
blast wave; (b) movement such that the material will melt, and (c) form a slug and
get accelerated to high speed. Varying the precise shape of the liner — conical, near-
conical, spherical or others — can create substantial differences in the final shape
of the accelerated melt. These can now be designed on a computer quite accurately,

169
