18 Is There More to Understand?

The understanding of any field, including combustion, proceeds in stages. The un-
derstanding of complex interaction between fluid flow, combustion and heat trans-
fer in one or multiple dimensions is not always direct, simple or straightforward.
Sometimes very complex phenomena are amenable to one-dimensional concepts for
the purpose of understanding the principal mechanisms; sometimes not. That is
why, the effort becomes challenging and interesting.

Can we identify a few problems whose solution is yet to be understood grossly
and in detail?

Take the case of a candle. It is not possible to predict the burn rate of a candle
so easily. Why is it so?

Firstly, the situation is complex even under simplified axisymmetric assump-
tions, that make the problem two-dimensional. The physical phenomena to be ac-
counted for are not simple. The heat transfer back to the candle wax makes it melt.
The melted wax has to climb up the wick due to surface tension and vaporise on
the wick to burn up in the flame. Yes, there is nothing spectacular in the elements.
And, it is not solved.

What happens when oil is spilt on the surface of sea, something that happens
when an oil tanker is involved in an accident? The danger the oil slick poses to sea
birds, flora and fauna is very substantial. Is it possible to understand ignition and
flame propagation of oil-on-water?

Chemistry—dominated phenomena like inflammability limits have already been
mentioned as problems yet to be explored. Many such phenomena are being cur-
rently explored and much will be done by chemical kineticists in defining the re-
action scheme and its parameters and by combustion scientists in solving ‘realistic
problems’. The combustion of some fuels like alkanes (heptane, octane, kerosene
...) in kinetic regime is affected by the lack of the chemical s in pyrolysis and com-
bustion, for these are very complex molecules indeed. The work towards revealing
the basis for decomposition of such fuels has begun in recent times. More will be
done in the future.

Combustion of composite propellants in an far as their burn rate dependence
on pressure is yet to be satisfactorily modelled. The time is ripe for solving com-

177
