17 Explosives — Solid and Liquid

result, in fact, closer to the spherical geometry. The dimensions of the explosive,
the kinetic parameters, thermal conductivity, are all contained in the definition of
) and can be used to explain the dependencies of explosive character on these pa-
rameters through the criterion of explosion indicated above. The proportionality
with respect to L? and exp(—FE/RT,) will explain why larger sizes and those with
higher activation energy will explode. It is for these reasons that in explosive indus-
tries material is transported using only small sizes of the explosive substances. As
described earlier, major explosions of AN (ammonium nitrate) transported in large
quantities on ships can be traced to the size effect described above.

17.7 Overview

This chapter has considered the subject of detonation that occurs in gases, liquids
and solids. In the case of gases, the two limiting propagation features are deflagra-
tion and detonation. Deflagration is a subsonic flame propagation producing little
pressure changes. Detonation is a supersonic propagation with substantial pres-
sure changes. Since propagation is supersonic, such a propagation in condensed
phase leads to very high velocities (because acoustic speeds in condensed phase
are very high) and to extreme pressure changes that are catastrophic. There are
substances that detonate easily and deflagrate with difficulty; and others that de-
flagrate easily but detonate with difficulty. There is use for each of these in a variety
of applications, several of which are useful to society. Detonations in gaseous mix-
tures are understood better and can be predicted. Detonation in liquids and solids
are far more difficult to understand. Hence, most of the development in explosives
is still in the realm of sophisticated art; yet, the current data collection and under-
standing are such that one can design weapons and explosives meant for specific
applications using conservation equations that involves both fluid mechanics and
solid mechanics.

176
