17 Explosives — Solid and Liquid

heat generated because of the auto-catalytic reactions cannot be dissipated into the
surroundings at a rate matching its generation, and hence the temperature of the
solid begins to rise. This leads to explosion. This phenomenon can be formulated
as an unsteady conduction—reaction balance problem, with the initial conditions
depending on the ambient temperature and boundary conditions depending on the
heat lost into the atmosphere or to a set temperature at the outer surface. The solu-
tion to the problem will describe the behaviour of the temperature profiles in time.
For some sizes, ambient temperatures (= initial temperature) and reaction parame-
ters (like the activation energy and frequency factor) of a particular solid, the peak
temperature, which occurs at the centre of the solid, will rise exponentially; this is
interpreted asan explosion. Stated this way, this problem is complicated to handle
analytically. Instead, the problem can be posed differently. Consider the steady
state problem and ask the question whether a steady solution to the problem exists
or not. If it exists, then there will be no explosion. If no solution exists, then it is
a case of explosion. This approach is simple and works very well. Frank Kamenet-
skii, in his book Diffusion and Chemical Kinetics, has outlined the procedure and
obtained results in delightfully simple and elegant manner for solids in plane two-
dimensional, cylindrical and spherical configurations. The governing equation is

2
ee — nat = HA,Y,exp(—E/RT), (17.10)
where VY, is the mass fraction of the reactant. The mass fraction can be related
to temperature using the Schvab—Zeldovich formalism as Y, = (Ty — T)/(Ty — 1p),
where Ty and 7 are the flame and ambient temperatures respectively. The pa-
rameter n in the second term on the left-hand side is 0 for plane geometry, 1 for
cylindrical geometry and 2 for spherical geometry. In the case of explosion, the
deviation in temperature from the ambient value to that required to cause explo-
sion will not be much and therefore, the amount of reactant which is consumed is
small and hence Y, can be treated as 1 in the analysis. One can non-dimensionalize
various terms in the equation by

E (T-Tp) HAL? E
_ ow Wt) oo ec ~ exp(—E/RT 17.11
RT, To kTo RTp exp (= B/RTp), ( )

 

§=x/Le, 0

where L. is the size of the explosive and 7; represents both the initial and the
boundary temperature. The normalised equation assuming small departures of T’
from 7; can be written as

d’0 nd

— = ——=-0 0 17.12

Eid exp(0) (17.12)
The boundary conditions can be set for 6 as §(1) = 0. Symmetry condition gives 0 =

0. First, let us consider the case n = 0 (plane case). The fact that the second order
differential equation does not have any term explicitly in £ allows reduction of the

174
