17.6 Explosion and Detonation - Simple analyses

The above theory assumes that reaction occurs instantaneously when the shock
sw the fluid. In reality, reactions do take time. This inevitably leads to the question
of the determination of the structure of the detonation wave. This calls for the use
of conservation equations written in differential form to include the reaction rates.
A simple and very elegant theory has been explored by Zel'dovich, von Neumann.
and Doring, in whose names the structure is called the ZND structure of detona-
tion. The essential content of the theory is that when shock propagates through
a gas (or any substance) it heats up the gas to high temperature which initiates
exothermic reactions behind the shock wave. The experimental observations gen-
erally follow the conclusions reached by the ZND theory. The shock thickness is an
inverse function of the shock Mach number and is of the order of 3 to 6 molecular
mean free paths. Since chemistry depends on high energy collisions, if it occurs as it
does, it must be accomplished with very high probability since the number of possi-
ble collisions itself is small. This implies that most reactions should occur at nearly
the peak temperature. This implies that the details of the temperature profile are
not very relevant. Hence, the predictions of the theory whose quality of prediction
does not have to depend on the details of the profile turn out to be good when one
considers situations where one-dimensional approximations are valid. Deviations
occur because of the finite size of the duct containing the gas mixture. Detonation
velocity varies inversely with pressure and diameter of the explosive. Both these
have been explained as due to boundary layer behind the travelling detonation in-
side the tube. Many experimental results of the kind described above have been
borne out by calculations quite satisfactorily. One of the contributory reasons for
this is the equation of state which can be taken as ideal in a gaseous medium even
though pressures are high because temperatures are also high.

We now turn to detonations in condensed phases. Even though the broad prin-
ciples of detonation are the same as in the gas phase, the aspect concerning the
equation of state complicates the matter substantially in the condensed phase. To
appreciate this, we need to look at some elementary facts. The acoustic speed In
air at 300 K is 340 m/s. It is about 1600-2000 m/s in a solid. If a shock wave were
to travel through a solid at a Mach number of 1.5, the pressure rise will be 10,000-
15.000 atm. If the Mach number is 9, the pressure rise is in excess of 500,000 atm.
The temperature rise is about the same - 3000 to 5000 K. Under these pressures,
even though temperatures are high, the fluid density is so high that non-ideal ef-
fects with respect to the equation of state become very important, which needs to
be accounted for. Uncertainty in the parameters of the equation of state leads to
the use of detonation data to fix these parameters, and hence the predictability of
the theory is compromised.

We now take up the dependence of explosion (or otherwise) of reactive solids as
a function of size and their chemical properties. Whenever reactive solids are trans-
ported, size becomes an important criterion. One should carry them in relatively
small amounts and sizes. The basic reason is that beyond a particular size, the

173
